XIV Congress of the 
European Society for Evolutionary Biology
Program
Congress information
About Lisbon
Contact us
Register for congressSign in
Abstracts
SY30: Phylogenetics and phylogeography
 Abstracts list Schedule Description
View only talks or posters
Elena Kochieva
Center “Bioengineering” RAS
Department of Genetic Engineering
Russia
Pisum genome variability detected by AFLP and RGA profiling
poster D21SY30PS0865

Author(s): Kochieva, EZ, Dyachenko, EA

Summary: 

Pea (P. sativum L.) is an important legume grown and consumed extensively worldwide. In the present study for the first time two different multiloci techniques - AFLP and RGA-profiling have been used for genetic diversity assessment and taxa boundaries delimitation in Pisum species. RGA-profiling technique was used to determine NBS-LRR plant pathogen resistance genes polymorphism. In contrast, AFLP technique allows to investigate mostly evolutionary neutral genome sequences. Both approaches can provide comprehensive genome diversity information. Genetic diversity of 110 Pisum accessions of different origin representing P. fulvum and P. sativum species, including abyssinicum, asiaticum, transcaucasicum and arvense accessions with unclear taxonomic status was analyzed using AFLP and RGA- profiling. By using preselected primer combinations 405 AFLP and 171 RGA polymorphic bands have been detected. As a result, for each pea genotype unique AFLP and RGA-specific patterns have been revealed. The dendrogram and PCA based on calculated GD values revealed two distinct groups corresponding to P. sativum and P. fulvum. Other taxa formed one mixed group with P. sativum accessions. Notably, on AFLP, PCA-plot all P. sativum formed continuum with two main poles, largely represented Asian or European accessions. On RGA-profiling PCA-plot, no geographical and taxonomical differentiations within P.sativum accessions were determined. No correlation between pea accession grouping and resistance status or ability to interact with arbuscular mycorrhiza was found. Obtained data suggested that genus Pisum is composed only of two clear species: P. sativum and P. fulvum. There is no differentiation between abyssinicum, asiaticum, arvense, transcaucasicum and sativum,that confirm their subspecies taxonomic status. Molecular characterization of Pisum genetic diversity levels may help to identify potential new sources useful in pea breeding. The work was supported by FRP "Biological Diversity".

Isa Pais
Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência
Portugal
A first genetic study of Microcebus tavaratra, a little known mouse lemur from the north of Madagascar
poster D21SY30PS1014

Author(s): Pais, IGA, Salmona, J, Kun-Rodrigues, C, Viana Meyler, S, Rabarivola, C, Mohamed-Thani, I, Chikhi, L

Summary: 

Madagascar is one of the most important Biodiversity Hotspots in the world. Still, many areas are poorly studied, as is the case of Daraina in the north of the island. In 2010, the highly fragmented forests of this region were surveyed, and the presence of several individuals belonging to the mouse lemur genus (Microcebus) was recorded. In the field, it proved difficult to identify the species encountered by using morphometric measurements, and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) was sequenced. Furthermore, seven nuclear loci (microsatellites) were genotyped. Altogether three mtDNA regions (COII, Cyt b and D-loop) were sequenced for 72 Microcebus individuals sampled in three forest fragments (Binara, Solaniampilana and Bekaraoka), in order to determine if all members belonged to the same species (M. tavaratra) as two individuals previously identified in this same region by other researchers. We also wanted to describe the patterns of genetic diversity of the sampled populations and determine if genetic clusters could be identified and potentially associated to specific features of the habitat, such large rivers or roads. The results suggest that all individuals belong to the M. tavaratra species and that high genetic variation at the nuclear level is maintained in all three populations. The same is observed at the mitochondrial level, with the exception of the population from Binara, which surprisingly did not present any genetic diversity across all mtDNA loci. Moreover, no clear clustering could be defined at the nuclear level, possibly due to the limited number of loci. Despite being currently the most geographically widespread study on Microcebus from Daraina, our results suggest that more research should be carried out across the whole region by increasing both the number of samples and loci. Studies like this one are important for the implementation of appropriate and effective conservation plans for threatened species.

Mehrnoush Panahi
Institute of Botany, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw
Systematics and Plant Geography
Poland
A phylogeny of subtribe Ferulinae (tribe Scandiceae, Apiaceae) inferred from nuclear rDNA ITS and cpDNA (rps16, rpoC1 introns and rpoB-trnC spacer) sequence variation
poster D21SY30PS0432

Author(s): Panahi, M, Spalik, K, Banasiak, L

Summary: 

Phylogenetic relationships within Apiaceae tribe Scandiceae subtribe Ferulinae were investigated using sequence data from the chloroplast DNA and nuclear ribosomal DNA internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions. One hundred and seventy-six accessions were examined, representing the genera of the subtribe (Ferula, Dorema, Leutea) and outgroup taxa. The cpDNA markers included three non-coding loci: rpoB-trnC intergenic spacer, rps16 intron and rpoC1 intron. These loci were analyzed separately and combined to assess their relative utility for resolving relationships. Partition homogeneity tests yielded trees that demonstrated the incongruency between cpDNA and nrDNA regions. Among the loci examined, rps16 intron showed less variability relative to its size than the other used cpDNA markers. Phylogenies derived from maximum parsimony and Bayesian analyses of combined cp and nr DNA sequences for 156 accessions (representing 114 species of Ferula, 6 species of Dorema, 9 species of Leutea and 10 outgroup taxa) were resolved to some extent. Based on these analyses, Dorema is nested within Ferula and should be therefore subsumed within the latter. In contrast, Leutea appears to be in a sister position to Ferula and should be retained as a separate genus. Subtribe Ferulinae is diversified in central Asia, floristically encompassing the central and eastern part of the Irano-Turanian Floristic Region where the representatives of nearly all major groups occur, with the notable exception of two groups that are mostly distributed in the Mediterranean region and in China. However, since the species boundaries in Ferula are not clear, one may also suspect that the high number of species, particularly of the central Asiatic endemics, may have resulted from taxonomic splitting rather than rapid radiation of the genus in this region.

Verena Kutschera
Biodiversity and Climate Research Center, Frankfurt
Germany
A range-wide synthesis and timeline for phylogeographic events in the red fox (Vulpes vulpes)
talk D23SY30RT18:57R8

Author(s): Kutschera, VE, Hailer, F

Summary: 

Many boreo-temperate mammals have a Pleistocene fossil record throughout Eurasia and North America, but only few have a contemporary distribution that spans this large area. Examples of Holarctic-distributed carnivores are the brown bear, grey wolf and red fox, all three ecological generalists with large dispersal capacity and a high adaptive flexibility. While the two former have been examined extensively across their ranges, no phylogeographic study of the red fox has been conducted across its entire Holarctic range. Moreover, no study included samples from central Asia, leaving a large sampling gap in the middle of the Eurasian landmass. We obtained the first mitochondrial DNA sequence data of red foxes from Siberia, and new sequences from several European populations. In a range-wide synthesis of more than 500 previously published and publicly available red fox mitochondrial control region sequences and 52 newly obtained sequences, we describe the pattern and timing of major phylogeographic events in red foxes, using a Bayesian coalescence approach with multiple fossil tip and root calibration points. All newly sequenced individuals belonged to the previously described Holarctic lineage. Our analyses confirmed the presence of three Nearctic- and two Japan-restricted lineages that were formed since the Mid/Late Pleistocene. The phylogeographic history of red foxes is highly similar to that previously described for grey wolves and brown bears, indicating that climatic fluctuations and habitat changes since the Pleistocene had similar effects on these highly mobile generalist species. All three species originally diversified in Eurasia and later colonized North America and Japan several times independently. North American lineages persisted through the last glacial maximum south of the ice sheets, meeting more recent colonizers from Beringia during postglacial expansion into the northern Nearctic.

Isabel Liberal
Real Jardín Botánico (CSIC)
Departament of Biodiversity and Conservation
Spain
Accommodating hybrid/introgressed lineages in the multispecies coalescent: the complex evolutionary history of Antirrhinum unraveled
poster D21SY30PS0820

Author(s): Liberal, IM, Blanco-Pastor, J, Pfeil, BE, Vargas, P

Summary: 

Antirrhinum L. (snapdragons; c. 25 spp.) is an Old World plant genus primarily distributed in the western Mediterranean basin. Antirrhinum exhibits many interesting ecological and morphological features. Active research has been undertaken on pollination biology and biogeography and some species (mainly Antirrhinum majus L.) have been traditionally much appreciated due to its ornamental value as well as to its importance as a model system for molecular floral development. In spite of this research attention, and regardless the extensive efforts made, the phylogenetic relationships within the genus are far from being well resolved. Previous phylogenetic analyses failed to infer species relationships within the genus. The difficulty in defining species boundaries and the low phylogenetic resolution suggested an early rapid diversification of the genus. Under this scenario, processes obscuring phylogenetic reconstruction such as hybridization/introgression and/or incomplete lineage sorting are likely to have occurred. Moreover, hybridization processes in field and under controlled conditions were previously reported in several Antirrhinum species. In order to obtain accurate phylogenetic relationships within Antirrhinum we obtained allelic data from two low-copy nuclear genes and three plastid loci. We carried out coalescent-based simulations to distinguish hybridization from coalescent stochasticity. Additionally, we incorporated hybrids/introgressed species in the multispecies coalescent model by using a multilabelling approach in which a lineage of hybrid origin is represented with two sources of parental contribution. This methodology allowed the accurate reconstruction of complex evolutionary patterns that have occurred in this group of species extensively used for evolutionary research.

Praveen Karanth
Indian Institute of Science
Centre for Ecological Sciences
India
An island called India: Phylogenetic patterns across multiple taxonomic groups reveal endemic radiations
poster D21SY30PS0503

Author(s): Karanth, P

Summary: 

The Indian subcontinent is an interesting biogeographical entity as it is isolated from the rest of the Asian landmass by very high mountain ranges like the Himalayas in the north and is surrounded by ocean in the south. Furthermore much of this landmass was part of a Gondwanan fragment that merged with Asia around 35-55 mya. Thus Indian subcontinent has witnessed prolonged periods of isolation and continues to be largely cut off from much of Asia. In this regard the subcontinent is very similar to an island separated from the mainland (Asia). One interesting feature of an isolated island is the presence of endemic radiations, i.e., unique clades of taxa whose members are endemic to the island. Recent phylogenetic studies have revealed that India also harbors numerous endemic radiations and these endemic assemblages were generated through in-situ diversification. Thus to this day India is very similar to an isolated island. It is interesting to contrast the Indian scenario with Madagascar an island with which India shares a geological past. Furthermore these finding have important implications for ecological and evolutionary studies on Indian biota.

Magdalena Herdegen
Jagiellonian University
Institute of Environmental Sciences
Poland
Analysis of population structure of guppies in north-eastern Venezuela, the area of putative incipient speciation
poster D21SY30PS0279

Author(s): Herdegen, M, Alexander, H, Babik, W, Radwan, J, Mavárez, J, Breden, F

Summary: 

Geographic barriers to gene flow are one of the main causes of genetic isolation. Reproductive isolation often follows, which in turn may lead to speciation. The guppy from the Cumaná region of Eastern Venezuela has been previously described as a case of incipient speciation, significantly differentiated from the common guppy, Poecilia reticulata, which occurs on the other side of Cordillera de la Costa in streams belonging to the Orinoco drainage. Here, we present a comprehensive analysis of differentiation between guppy populations in these two regions of Eastern Venezuela based on mtDNA and a set of 15 microsatellites. We also analyse four phenotypic traits which have been found in earlier work to differ between the Cumaná and common guppy. Guppies inhabiting the two regions divided by Cordillera de la Costa indeed show significant genetic differentiation, but most genetic variation was distributed among populations within regions. Most guppies in the Cumaná region had mtDNA from a distinct lineage, but we also found evidence for a widespread introgression of mtDNA from the Orinoco drainage into the Cumaná region. Populations from the two regions differed significantly in the number of black crescents, but not in other phenotypic traits analysed. Overall, our findings are consistent with only partial genetic isolation between the two geographic regions. Gene flow from the Orinoco drainage may have caused the loss of typical Cumaná morphology in many populations.

Emily Lemmon
Florida State University
Department of Biological Science
United States
Anchored Phylogenomics: Accelerating the Resolution of Life
talk D24SY30IT11:18R1

Author(s): Lemmon, EM

Summary: 

The field of phylogenomics is undergoing a revolution, enabled by new methods of data collection that leverage both genomic resources and recent advances in DNA sequencing. We developed a cost-efficient and rapid approach to obtaining data from 100s to 1000s of loci and individuals for deep and shallow phylogenetic studies. Specifically, we designed probes for target hybrid enrichment of 100s of loci in conserved anchor regions of genomes (flanked by less conserved regions). We enriched genomic DNA libraries for these anchor regions, and sequenced these targets using high-throughput sequencing. The resulting data sets contain 100s of loci with low levels of missing data and high levels of phylogenetic information across taxonomic scales and produce phylogenies with high levels of resolution. This approach is expediting resolution of deep-scale portions of the Tree of Life and greatly accelerating resolution of the large number of shallow clades that remain unresolved. The combination of low cost (~1% of the cost of traditional Sanger sequencing and ~3.5% of the cost of high-throughput amplicon sequencing for projects on the scale of 500 loci × 100 individuals) and rapid data collection (~2 weeks of laboratory time) make this approach tractable even for researchers working on systems with limited genomic resources. Here, I present new work from vertebrates and unpublished data from various non-vertebrate (e.g., Coleoptera, Hymenoptera, etc.) and plant (e.g., Angiosperm) clades; I also discuss future directions and new applications.

Joana Marques
Lund University
Department of Biology
Sweden
Are the divergent migration destinations of Bogong moths Agrotis infusa (Noctuidae: Lepidoptera) related to genetic differentiation?
poster D21SY30PS0910

Author(s): Marques, JF, Heinze, S, Fatarova, M, Svensson, GP, Anderbrant, O, Green, K, Warrant, E

Summary: 

Long-distance seasonal migration mechanisms are still unclear, albeit their importance to species persistence and ecosystem functioning. Many populations have well defined migratory destinations and this might have important consequences on their genetic structuring: whereas different breeding grounds and divergent migratory pathways and destinations may result in a lower degree of genetic mixing hence promoting genetic differentiation, the use of common breeding and overwintering/summering grounds may result in a lack of genetic differentiation. Every spring, adult Australian Bogong moths (Agrotis infusa) migrate from western New South Wales and south-eastern Queensland to the Snowy Mountains (the highest peaks of the Great Dividing Range) to estivate in cool rock crevices and caves; they then return to their breeding grounds during the autumn to mate. During estivation, the moths are gregarious and remain in diapause serving as food for many insectivorous animals given their high body fat content (around 65%). Owing to their different summering sites, some may fly up to 1000 km in a single direction. Although some attempts to use genetic markers to identify specific natal sites of adult Bogong moths have been made, it is still unknown whether the different migratory pathways and destinations have a genetic basis. In summer 2012-2013, Bogong moths were collected live by hand at four estivation sites in New South Wales (Mount Gingera, South Ramshead, Mount Morgan, and Mount Tingaringy) and examined for sequence and haplotype diversity and genetic distance at mitochondrial and nuclear genes. The data will elucidate if differences in the migration routes and summering sites of these moths depend on—or have resulted in—genetic divergence, which will be essential for Bogong moth conservation. The Bogong moth is an iconic Australian species and the protection of their summering sites may be crucial to maintain species variability.

Rasmus Heller
Gulbenkian Institute of Science
Portugal
Assessing the confounding effect of population structure on Bayesian skyline plot inferences of demographic history
talk D23SY30RT15:45R8

Author(s): Heller, R, Chikhi, L, Siegismund, HR

Summary: 

It is well known that population structure can confound coalescent-based inferences of past population size changes when it is not properly accounted for. Although the vast majority of species are genetically structured to some extent, few studies have quantified how different types and levels of structure might confound demographic inference. Among the most widely applied demographic inference methods is the Bayesian skyline plot (BSP and the derived EBSP), which assume a panmictic model without structure. We simulated DNA sequence data under a variety of scenarios involving structured populations with variable levels of gene flow and analysed them using EBSPs as implemented in the software package BEAST. Results revealed that BSPs can show false signals of population decline under several biologically plausible combinations of population structure and sampling strategy, suggesting that the interpretation of several previous studies may need to be re-evaluated. We found that sampling strategies present a trade-off between minimizing the risk of false positives and maximizing the power to detect recent demographic events. Therefore, a balanced sampling strategy whereby samples are distributed over several populations provides the best scheme for inferring demographic change over the time scale that is typically of interest. Case studies demonstrate that although the structure effect should always be accounted for, some systems will be more susceptible than others. Our study provides a much-needed quantification of the structure effect in BSP analyses and some practical guidelines to keep in mind before attempting such analyses.

Sonya Clegg
Griffith University
Environmental Futures Centre
Australia
Avian malaria diversity in southern Melanesia: exploring potential influences on distribution patterns and divergence of host bird species
talk D21SY30RT18:33R2

Author(s): Clegg, S, Olsson-Pons, S, Clark, N, Ishtiaq, F

Summary: 

Host-pathogen interactions have the potential to influence broad scale ecological and evolutionary processes in host populations, influencing levels of endemism, divergence patterns and distributions. The development of localized co-adapted host-pathogen relationships could drive divergent selection and limit gene flow among populations of the same species or limit range expansions of closely related species. To examine the potential for pathogens to direct these types of processes in natural host populations, we explored the phylogenetic diversity and prevalence of avian malaria parasites, and the distribution of lineages across islands and host species, in southern Melanesian bird communities. We uncovered high avian malaria diversity, including many rare lineages, pointing to high estimates of undiscovered lineage richness in the region. While significant phylogeographic structuring of parasite lineages was detected, most genetic variation was distributed within rather than between island locations. Only a small number of lineages could be considered generalist with respect to host species infection. Parasite lineage-host associations were evident at the host family and host species level, and in a few cases, at the local host population level. Prevalence varied significantly among islands, but not among host species, and for three widely sampled host species, there was a significant interaction term demonstrating variation in prevalence in different populations of the same species. The heterogeneity demonstrated in both the complement and the prevalence of parasite lineages infecting local avian communities likely exposes species to a mosaic of disease-related selection pressures across their naturally fragmented distributions in southern Melanesia. Therefore interactions between avian malaria parasites and their avian hosts are an important factor to consider when examining avian divergence and distribution patterns in this region.

Paloma Martínez-Rodríguez
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Departmento de Biología
Spain
Co-divergence between bacteria and host: Consequences of Wolbachia infection in the Chorthippus parallelus hybrid zone
talk D22SY30RT11:42R9

Author(s): Martínez-Rodríguez, P, Arroyo-Yebras, F, Bella, JL

Summary: 

Divergence between two subspecies of the grasshopper Chorthippus parallelus has been extensively studied for evolutionary purposes. They form a hybrid zone in the Pyrenees between the Iberian endemic subspecies C. p. erythropus and the continental European subspecies C. p. parallelus (1). Wolbachia infection in pure and hybrid individuals of these subspecies has been characterized by PCR analysis of their 16S rRNA sequences and a Multi-Locus Strain Typing System (MLST) (2). Phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies based on previous host phylogeny, as well as this MLST approach, show that Wolbachia co-diverges with its host. In addition, extrapolation of the divergence time between bacterial strains allows us to propose than Wolbachia infected C. parallelus during host speciation. This fact, joint to the cytoplasmic incompatibility and other effects induced by this bacterium in natural populations of C. parallelus (3, 4) support that co-divergence between bacteria and host contributes to explain the current situation of the hybrid zone.

References

(1) Shuker DM, et al. 2005. “The genetic basis of speciation in a grasshopper hybrid zone”. En “Insect Evolutionary Ecology”. CABI Publishing, Oxford University Press, pp 427-454. ISBN 0851998127. (2) Baldo L, et al. 2006. Multilocus Sequence Typing System for the Endosymbiont Wolbachia pipientis. Appl Environ Microbiol 72:7098-7110. (3) Bella, J.L, Martínez-Rodríguez, P., Arroyo-Yebras, F., Bernal, A., Sarasa, J., Fernández-Calvín, B, Mason, P.L. & Zabal-Aguirre, M. 2010. “Wolbachia infection in the Chorthippus parallelus hybrid zone: evidence for its role as a reproductive barrier”. Journal of Orthoptera Research, 19 (2): 205-212. (4) Sarasa, J., Bernal, A., Fernández-Calvín, B. & Bella, J.L. 2013. Wolbachia induced cytogenetical effects, as evidenced in Chorthippus parallelus (Orthoptera). Cytogenetic and Genome Research 139: 36–43.

Ângela Ribeiro
University of Porto
CIIMAR - Centro Interdisciplinar de Investigação Marinha e Ambiental
Portugal
Coagulation cascade: an evolutionary perspective across vertebrates
poster D21SY30PS1047

Author(s): Ribeiro, ÂM, Zepeda, L, Gilbert, T, Da Fonseca, RR

Summary: 

Blood coagulation is a defense mechanism that enhances organism survival by preventing uncontrolled blood loss in vertebrates. This defense mechanism has to be tightly controlled so the clot forms when and where it is required. Birds exhibit prolonged coagulation time relative to values obtained for mammals. The prolonged coagulation time phenotype observed in birds is shared with reptiles, and within Aves an inter-specific variation has also been described. Despite biochemically and physiologically extensively studied, our understanding about the evolution of the coagulation network in vertebrates is still lagging. Given the increasing availability of genomic-level data we set to uncover the evolutionary story of this fine-tuned network, with a particular emphasis in Aves. The human transcripts for eighteen genes known to encode proteins associated with coagulation response were blasted against the protein coding genes of extant vertebrates available from genomic databases. We included mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians and fishes. The orthologous proteins were aligned, coverage and protein identity estimated. We found that the clotting cascade in birds involves fewer genes than the mammalian one. The main difference uncovered pertains the membrane receptors from platelet (mammals)/thrombocytes (non-mammals). We propose that the mammalian innovations, i.e. factors only present in mammals, stem for the platelet ability to form resistant clots. And we put forward, that this might be an efficient mechanism for fast and effective control of bleeding from the placental site to prevent fatal hemorrhage during delivery.

Eduardo Marabuto
Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon
Department of Animal Biology
Portugal
Comparative phylogeography and genetic population structure of two butterfly species from the Iberian Peninsula
poster D21SY30PS1111

Author(s): Marabuto, E, Martins, R, Silva, DN, Seabra, SS, Paulo, OS

Summary: 

The Iberian Peninsula is recognized as one of the most important refugia for temperate species during the cyclic climatic changes of the Plio-Pleistocene glacial periods. Mountainous regions within these refugia areas are also believed to retain high levels of endemism and genetic diversity due to the easily tracked suitable habitats by upward-downward movements. Here we examine population genetic structure, phylogeographic and demographic patterns of Lycaena bleusei, a butterfly species endemic to the Central Iberian Mountain System and contrast this to the patterns found for a congeneric widespread species, also occurring in the Iberian Peninsula, Lycaena tityrus. We use two molecular markers to understand if there is congruency in their evolutionary histories or, conversely, if different evolutionary drivers may have shaped these species differently. We find that the two species, which exhibit similar dispersal abilities and ecological requirements, show different demographic and genetic patterns. We hypothesize that these differences are due to the evolutionary forces acting on species that contracted to southern refugia during the Pleistocene and that, ultimately, drove to population differentiation and speciation. We also find evidence for hybridization events between these two species, with L. bleusei males coming in contact with L. tityrus females on a secondary contact zone described here for the first time.

Olivier Hardy
Université Libre de Bruxelles
Organism Biology
Belgium
Comparative phylogeography of African rain forest trees: a review of genetic signatures of vegetation history in the Guineo-Congolian region
talk D21SY30RT16:33R2

Author(s): Hardy, OJ

Summary: 

The biogeographic history of the African rain forests has been contentious. Phylogeography, the study of the geographic distribution of genetic lineages within species, can highlight the signatures of historical events affecting the demography and distribution of species (population fragmentation or size changes, range expansion/contraction) and, thereby, the ecosystems they belong to. The accumulation of recent data for African rain forest plants now enables a first biogeographic synthesis. In this review, we explain which phylogeographic patterns are expected under different scenarios of past demographic changes; and we give an overview of the patterns detected in African rain forest trees to discuss whether they support alternative hypotheses regarding the history of the African rain forest cover. Phylogeographic patterns indicate that most of the widespread species showing nowadays a near continuous spatial distribution have been fragmented in the past. The major genetic discontinuities in the region support the role of refugia during climatic oscillations, and at a large scale they often match the main phytogeographic subdivision of the Guineo-Congolian region. However, patterns vary substantially among species and they provide only partial support for current hypotheses on the location of Pleistocene forest refuges. Among the patterns shared by many species, we highlight a recurrent genetic discontinuity between the north and the south of the Lower Guinean region which matches the climatic hinge on each side of which dry and wet seasons are inverted. Whether this discontinuity results from past forest fragmentation or current climate conditions is discussed.

Alastair Potts
Faculty of Science of the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University
Department of Botany
South Africa
Comparative phylogeography of three tree species from the Albany Subtropical Thicket of South Africa: testing cornerstone hypotheses of a large-scale conservation network
talk D21SY30RT18:09R2

Author(s): Potts, AJ, Hedderson, TA, Cowling, RM

Summary: 

An ambitious large-scale network of conservation areas and corridors has been designed with the aim of preserving the evolutionary patterns and processes of the Albany Subtropical Thicket biome of South Africa. Two main hypotheses, largely based on expert opinion, formed the foundation for this conservation plan: 1) drainage basins are discrete biogeographical, and thus evolutionarily-distinct, units, and 2) long-distance movement of the primary agents of disturbance in this landscape, African elephants (Loxodonta africana), is critical for ecosystem functioning. Here we test these hypotheses using chloroplast phylogeography of three tree species with similar ecologies but different seed dispersal syndromes, specifically Nymania capensis (Meliaceae; inflated wind-dispersed seeds), Pappea capensis (Sapindaceae; small bird-dispersed seeds) and Schotia afra (Fabaceae, large seed-pods dispersed by elephants and other large mammals). Each drainage basin was found to have isolated populations of the wind- and bird-dispersed species, whereas the elephant-dispersed species has a single regional meta-population that extends across all the drainage basins. These results suggest that the deeply-incised drainage basins along the coastal lowlands of South Africa are unique phylogeographic, as well as biogeographic, units for species that that lack long-distance dispersal mechanisms over such a topographically-complex landscape. At present, elephants and many other large herbivores are restricted to an extremely reduced and fragmented proportion of their historical distribution along the coastal lowlands. The phylogeographic patterns of S. afra highlight the importance of re-establishing the free movement of megaherbivores across the regional landscape for this and other elephant-dispersed plants. These phylogeographic patterns offer pivotal support for the proposed network of conservation corridors for this biome.

Eva Jimenez-Guri
Centre de Regulacio Genomica
Biologia de Sistemes
Spain
Comparative transcriptomics of early Dipteran development
poster D21SY30PS0119

Author(s): Jimenez-Guri, E, Huerta-Cepas, J, Cozzuto, L, Wotton, KR, Roma, G, Gabaldon, T, Jaeger, J

Summary: 

We are carrying out a comparative analysis of transcriptomic sequence data in early embryos of three emerging experimental dipteran model systems. Clogmia albipunctata belongs to a lineage of flies believed to have diverged early in the evolution of the dipterans, while the lineage leading to Megaselia abdita branched intermediately, at the base of the cyclorraphans, and the lineage leading to Episyrphus balteatus diverged later in the cyclorraphans.

We have acquired and assembled transcriptomic sequences at early embryonic stages in Clogmia albipunctata and Megaselia abdita. We compare these sequences to those from Episyrphus balteatus as well as transcriptomic and genomic sequences from drosophilids and/or mosquitoes. These datasets form the basis of a new phylogenomic assessment of dipteran relationships. It places psychodid moth midges (such as Clogmia) as a sister group to the brachycerans, rather than within the culicomorph lineage, in contrast to another recent study (Wiegman et al., 2011). Furthermore, we have analysed patterns of gene duplication in our datasets. Finally, we have verified information present in our transcriptomes by manual curation, in situ hybridization, and verification of alternative splicing events among a subset of genes present in the data.

Andrea Chiocchio
Università della Tuscia
Dipartimento di Scienze Ecologiche e Biologiche
Italy
Comparing patterns of genetic differentiation between island and mainland populations of two mountain newts
poster D21SY30PS1447

Author(s): Chiocchio, A, Bisconti, R, Canestrelli, D, Zampiglia, M, Nascetti, G

Summary: 

Island populations are expected to show reduced genetic diversity, population structure, and coalescence times with respect to mainland populations. We compared the phylogeographic and population genetic structure of two mountain newts, one endemic to the Corsica island (Euproctus montanus), and one endemic to the Apennine chain (northern Italy; Mesotriton alpestris apuanus). The two mountain ranges are close to one another (less than 200km far), have largely overlapping latitudinal ranges, and experienced similar climatic conditions throughout the Pleistocene. Contrary to the expectations based on its insularity, E. montanus showed far deeper phylogeographic structure and higher genetic diversity than the continental species M. alpestris. Indeed, we found five phylogroups of Pliocene origin among E. montanus populations, whereas three phylogroups of Pleistocene origin were found in M. alpestris. Differences in species ecology and habitat features are likely to explain most of the observed differences in species response to past climatic oscillations. However, these data, together with the growing literature on intra-island genetic variation, suggest caution with the use of simplifying assumptions on the evolutionary history and demographic structure of island populations, particularly as far as conservation planning is concerned.

Didier Aurelle
Aix-Marseille Universite
CNRS UMR 7263 IMBE
France
Connectivity in fragmented marine environments: a comparative approach between methods in two low dispersive species
poster D21SY30PS0262

Author(s): Aurelle, D, Mokthar-Jamaï, K, Pratlong, M, Jean-Baptiste, L

Summary: 

Marine populations are considered as demographically open populations linked by strong connectivity. The low levels of genetic differentiation observed at large geographic distances in many species is explained by the high dispersal capacities of these organisms linked with the occurrence of a larval phase in their life cycle. However, this view was recently questioned in various species such as sessile cnidarians in which significant genetic structure has been reported at local and regional scales. These results call for a reassessment of the connectivity in the sea by focusing on low dispersive species. In order to disentangle the relative impact of demographic and environmental processes on their connectivity, we performed a comparative analysis between two octocorals, the red coral Corallium rubrum and the red gorgonian Paramuricea clavata, in the same geographical area (North-Western Mediterranean). These species both inhabit contrasted ecological environment (e.g. different thermal regimes) and are confronted to past and current climate changes. Based on an extensive sampling and on microsatellite markers, we first compare different methods allowing the analysis of genetic structure and dispersal at different time scales: individual clustering, assignment, isolation by distance and probabilistic estimates of long-term dispersal. Then, we interpret genetic estimates of dispersal in the context of the evolution of these species in their complex landscape and of the interaction between migration and selection. The obtained results enhance our understanding of the mechanisms implied in the short distance differentiation observed in these species, including migration rate, effective population size and environmental parameters. We finally discuss the management and conservation issues related to these results and propose new research perspectives in this context.

Helene Magalon
University of Reunion Island
Lab ECOMAR
France
Connectivity of the coral Pocillopora eydouxi in the Southwestern Indian Ocean: a taxonomic challenge
poster D21SY30PS0781

Author(s): Magalon, H, Bigot, L, Gélin, P

Summary: 

Coral reefs are threatened by human impacts and global climate changes. Reef resilience after disturbance depends largely on dispersal and colonisation abilities of corals. We focused on a major constituent of the Western Indian Ocean reefs, the coral Pocillopora eydouxi. This branching species is abundant and distributed all around the Indo-Pacific Ocean, constituting a key species for the ecosystem. The aim of this study was to assess the connectivity of 9 populations (n=340 colonies of P. eydouxi) sampled from the outer reef slopes of 3 islands (3 populations per island) in the Southwestern Indian Ocean (Reunion to the south-east of Madagascar, Europa to the South of the Mozambique Channel and Tromelin to the north-east of Madagascar) using 9 microsatellite loci presenting no null alleles nor linkage disequilibrium. Distance between populations pairs ranged from 2 to 1600 km. All the 9 populations presented high significant heterozygote deficiency (FIS = 0.247-0.415). Between all pairs of populations, few differentiations were observed (FST = 0-0.07). Only Tromelin Island is differentiated from the others (mean FST*=0.037), but no isolation by distance pattern was found. Nearly all the genetic variance was distributed within populations among islands. Assignment tests using Bayesian statistics showed that, among all individuals of P. eydouxi, four distinct genetic clusters were identified. These four clusters were highly genetically differentiated (FST = 0.129-0.236**) but presented no congruence with the geographic origin of the individuals. Thus, these genetic clusters could be linked to the presence of cryptic species within a morphological type or to phenomenon of hybridization between several species. All these results question the taxonomy of the genus Pocillopora based on morphological characters. Nevertheless, the P. eydouxi* populations are highly connected in the Southwestern Indian Ocean.

Martin Ryberg
Uppsala University
Organismal Biology
Sweden
Constructing supermatrices from fungal INSD data – problems and solutions
poster D21SY30PS0579

Author(s): Ryberg, M, Matheny, PB

Summary: 

Many questions in macroevolution and macroecology are addressed using phylogenies. In many cases large phylogenies, including hundreds to many thousands of taxa, are needed to resolve these questions. The accumulation of sequences from different gene sources in public sequence databases, such as the International Nucleotide Sequence Databases (INSD; GenBank, ENA, DDBJ), has enabled an opportunity to reconstruct large supermatrix phylogenies. Supermatrix and supertree methods have been developed to infer phylogenies from mosaics of data accumulated from disparate studies. However, gene sequence data in INSD are coupled with several challenges regarding sequence quality, missing metadata, incongruity within metadata fields, and taxonomic confusion. One problem is the lack of standardized annotation from which region of the genome the sequence represents. Here we use HMMER to separate sequences from different genes and demonstrate how HMMER can be used to cut out genes/DNA regions within a single sequence. By partitioning sequences it is possible to fit separate substitution models to each gene. It is also possible to remove problematic regions. This is particularly useful in fungi where nuclear ribosomal DNA, characterized by substitution rate heterogeneity, is the most commonly sequenced region. Another problem is dubious taxonomic annotations. Erroneous taxonomic annotations may link sequences from different species together and create a chimeric concatenated sequence. To address this problem we introduce an individual based approach, combined with clustering, that links genes into operational taxonomic units and compare these to a species annotation based approach. The success of this approach depends on the structure of the data and the prevalence of metadata to define individuals. Our methods have been implemented in a software pipeline that can produce either supermatrices or trees for supertree approaches.

Mozes Blom
ANU Research School of Biology
Department of Evolution, Ecology and Genetics
Australia
Cryptic Crypto’s: Using a targeted DNA capture approach for phylogenomic analysis
poster D21SY30PS1151

Author(s): Blom, MPK, Bragg, J, Potter, S, Adams, M, Moritz, C

Summary: 

Elucidating the evolutionary relationships between lineages, is often a first requirement for studies focusing on micro- and macroevolutionary change. Where molecular phylogenetics has traditionally been hampered by the ability to generate large-scale orthologous sequence data, the recent developments in targeted capture of genomic regions in combination with next generation sequencing, now offer tremendous opportunity to generate such data and will aid in discerning phylogenetic associations at different levels of divergence. Here, we present the phylogenetic relationships between all currently described Australian Cryptoblepharus spp., a genus of small skinks that inhabit a wide range of ecotypes but where species delimitation based on morphology is often confusing. Furthermore, initial mtDNA and allozyme analysis indicate that convergent evolution of phenotypes in similar environments seems to be reoccurring, regardless of phylogenetic association between lineages. To test this phylogenetic hypothesis, we used an exon capture approach to extract specific exonic regions and subsequently sequenced those on the Illumina platform, thereby creating a multi locus sequence dataset suitable for phylogenetic reconstruction. Our study demonstrates that exon capture followed by NGS of targeted regions, is a powerful approach for phylogenetic purposes and thus provides a reliable estimation of evolutionary history.

Seán Kelly
Trinity College Dublin
Department of Zoology
Ireland
Cryptic avian diversity in the Sulawesi sub-region: a case study from the Wakatobi islands
poster D21SY30PS0983

Author(s): Kelly, SBA, Kelly, DJ, Cooper, N, Bahrun, A, Analuddin, K, Marples, NM

Summary: 

Species are the fundamental unit within evolutionary, biodiversity and conservation research. Accurate knowledge of the number of existing species is required to further our understanding of the patterns and processes that shape biodiversity. Cryptic species - two or more biologically distinct species classified as a single species due to morphological similarity - are therefore of great importance to evolutionary research. The discovery and recognition of such cryptic species requires an integrative, multi-disciplinary approach. We examined the taxonomic status of the Grey-sided Flowerpecker (Dicaeum celebicum kuehni) populations endemic to the Wakatobi islands. We present evidence from morphometric, genetic and phylogenetic analyses that describe the Wakatobi populations as a distinct, independently evolving species endemic to the Wakatobi archipelago. As the Wakatobi islands host a further five endemic subspecies, we feel these populations warrant re-examination. Previous studies of cryptic diversity in the Sulawesi sub-region have focussed predominantly on morphological, acoustic and plumage characteristics. Our results strongly suggest that the inclusion of modern genetic and phylogenetic techniques in future studies is essential to maximise the detection of cryptic diversity in this biologically rich sub-region.

Borja Mila
Spanish Research Council (CSIC)
National Museum of Natural Sciences
Spain
Cryptic divergence and evolutionary convergence in the diversification of the songbird genus Junco (Aves: Emberizidae)
poster D21SY30PS1337

Author(s): Mila, B, Friis, GT, Aleixandre, P

Summary: 

The rate and magnitude of phenotypic evolution can vary greatly among traits and taxa, and cases of convergent evolution and mutation-order divergence can further confound lineage history and the inference of speciation processes. We use molecular genetic tools and patterns of phenotypic variation to reconstruct the evolutionary history of the songbird genus Junco in order to understand the factors, mechanisms and timing of their diversification across North America. Analysis of mtDNA sequence and AFLPs revealed that plumage diversity in the dark-eyed junco, which has puzzled ornithologists for over a century, evolved recently as the yellow-eyed junco colonized the North American continent from southern Mexico following the Last Glacial Maximum. A new analysis of all known junco forms using a multilocus dataset reveals that junco populations at the tip of Baja California, Guadalupe Island in the Pacific, and the highlands of Guatemala, represent divergent lineages that have been isolated for hundreds of thousands of years, yet have differentiated relatively little in most traits. A phylogeny of the group reveals that the yellow-eyed and dark-eyed juncos are paraphyletic taxa. The Guadalupe junco is an old evolutionary lineage whose similarity to mainland dark-eyed juncos in plumage and eye color is due to convergence. Some phenotypic traits (eye and several plumage color traits) are not phylogenetically informative in juncos, whereas bill color or song characters are more consistent with neutral genetic markers. Drift or mutation-order divergence in long-term geographic isolation likely explains the differentiation of Guatemala and Baja juncos. In contrast, a role for sexual selection must be invoked to explain the rapid diversification of continental dark-eyed junco taxa. New genomic markers are being developed in order to clarify phylogenetic relationships among incipient lineages, identify “divergence islands”, and detect specific regions under selection.

Ana Pavan
Universidade de São Paulo
Genetics and Evolutionary Biology
Brazil
Cryptic diversity in Pteronotus parnellii (Mormoopidae) from the Guiana Shield: evidences from molecular, morphometric and bioacoustic tools
poster D21SY30PS1353

Author(s): Pavan, AC, De Thoisy, B, Catzeflis, F, Marroig, G

Summary: 

Mormoopidae is a neotropical family of bats with two genera, Mormoops and Pteronotus, ranging from south Texas to Brazil, and west of the Andes to Peru. The last systematic revision of this group recognized six species within Pteronotus: parnellii, macleayii, quadridens, personatus, davyi and gymnonotus. In P. parnellii, the most abundant and widely distributed species, numerous subspecies have been recognized along its distribution, but for the geographic range of the Guiana shield just the subspecies P. p. rubiginosus is actually described. Interest in the evolution and genetic variation of P. parnellii has increased recently and molecular studies have evidenced a cryptic diversity within this taxon. We investigated the diversity in P. parnellii based on acoustic (n=200), molecular (n=80) and cranial (n=80) tools in Guyana, Suriname, French Guiana and Brazil. The acoustic analysis showed two distinct groups in the same area: Group 1 emitted with a Frequency of Maximal Energy (FME) around 53 kHz, and Group 2 had their FME around 59 kHz. The skull measurements evidenced that Group 1 animals are larger than Group 2 ones, with several cranial variables allowing a discrimination of the two sympatric taxa. In the phylogenetic results, two distinct lineages with a genetic divergence higher than 5% were found. These lineages clearly correspond to the groups found by previous analyses, being composed by the same individuals. The groups are sympatric in part of their geographic distribution, co-occurring in many localities. Our results indicate that Group 1 corresponds to P. p. rubiginosus by including all specimens sampled from Mato Grosso, Brazil, the type-locality of this subspecies. It occurs from Central Brazil to the Guianas. Group 2 is found in the Brazilian states of Pará and Amapá, and in the Guianas. Based on multiple evidences, we believe that Groups 1 and 2 represent two distinct species, which we denote P. rubiginosus and Pteronotus sp nov, respectively.

Romain Nattier
Laboratoire Évolution, Génomes et Spéciation (LEGS)
UPR9034 CNRS
France
Cryptic genetic differentiation of Gambusia puncticulata (Teleostei: Poeciliidae) populations across Cuba
poster D21SY30PS1116

Author(s): Nattier, R, Ponce de León, J, Michel-Salzat, A, Laborde, L, Casane, D, García-Machado, E

Summary: 

Diversification of freshwater fishes on islands has been considered unlikely because the traits that enable successful colonization, broad salinity tolerance and potential for oceanic dispersal, may also constrain post-colonization genetic differentiation. However some freshwater fish exhibit genetic differentiation and geographic structure on islands, whereas others do not. It is unclear what conditions give rise to contrasting patterns of differentiation because relatively few comparative reconstructions of population history have been carried out for insular freshwater fishes. Cuba is one of the main biodiversity hotspots of the Caribbean. 44 percent of the freshwater fish species are endemic, but their origin is poorly known. The family Poeciliidae is particularly relevant to study the relative contribution of colonization and local diversification because it includes more than 93% endemic species, some of them are tolerant to broad salinity levels and thus thought to be able to disperse through oceanic barriers. Local diversification is also expected, but it should be relatively low in an island with a relatively complex topology but potential connection between regions. We sampled 300 specimens of Gambusia puncticulata covering their geographic distribution in Cuba. We sequenced mitochondrial (Cytb, 12S) and nuclear (ß-actin, S7) genes in order to reconstruct their phylogeny and their relationships with other non-Cuban species. 12 microsatellite markers were also analyzed. An important cryptic genetic diversity was observed which is concordant with previous results. In addition, it shows a high geographic organization in accordance with allopatric diversification on this island. However, the close phylogenetic relationships between non-Cuban species with some Cuban lineages suggest multiple and independent events of colonization. We discuss the likelihood of these different scenarios in relation with the recent geological history of Cuba and Caribbean region.

Elen Peres
Institute of Biology - University of Campinas
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents
Brazil
Deep divergence between populations of Araneus venatrix (Araneae: Araneidae) from Brazilian Rainforests
poster D21SY30PS1045

Author(s): Peres, EA, Solferini, VN

Summary: 

Neotropical rainforests (Amazonia and Atlantic) are among the most biodiverse regions of the world, with high endemism and species richness. These predominantly moist and dense biomes, although separated by a large dry corridor of open vegetation, exhibit similar climatic conditions and biotic composition. Geomorphological and paleopalinological data suggest an historical connection between these rainforests, but few phylogeographic studies focus on understanding these biomes formation and species diversification. We investigated the genetic structure and phylogeographic patterns of Araneus venatrix (Araneae: Araneidae), a spider with wide geographical range in Neotropics and predominantly found in humid environments. We sequenced mitochondrial COI and nuclear ITS2 regions of populations sampled along the species distribution. Molecular diversity parameters and pairwise FST indicated high genetic variability and strong population structure in this species. Analysis of molecular variance (AMOVA), haplotype networks and phylogenetic inferences revealed a deep divergence between two major groups, separating Atlantic Rainforest populations from the other samples. Molecular clocks with fossil calibration dated this divergence on Late Miocene (7.86 Ma, 95% HPD = 2.7–14.1 Ma). Our results suggest that the evolutionary processes responsible for the differentiation of A. venatrix lineages started before Quaternary, and do not reject hypotheses of Neotropical rainforests’ disjunction earlier than Pleistocene.

Rafael Molina-Venegas
Faculty of Biology, Seville University
Plant Biology and Ecology
Spain
Deep phylogenetic signal in the distribution of angiosperm diversity along elevational gradients in a Mediterranean Biodiversity Hotspot
poster D21SY30PS0464

Author(s): Molina-Venegas, R, Slingsby, J, Aparicio, A, Arroyo, J

Summary: 

Quantifying change in species and phylogenetic composition across biogeographic regions or environmental gradients (ß-diversity and ß-phylodiversity respectively) provides insight into the ecological and evolutionary processes that shape biodiversity. Here we investigated the entire angiosperm flora of the mountains of the Baetic range in Andalusia, one of the most diverse regions within the Mediterranean Basin Biodiversity Hotspot, quantifying ß-phylodiversity between bioclimatic elevational belts while accounting for differences in species ß-diversity. We also measured phylogenetic structure within each bioclimatic elevational belt, to assess how phylogenetic composition changes along the elevational gradients. We found ß-phylodiversity turnover was very strong among elevational ranges both within and between Sierras, but was significantly lower between floras of the same elevational range from different Sierras. This pattern was strongest within the Core Eudicots, but broke down in the Monocots and ancient Dicots. At medium to high elevations the flora was phylogenetically clustered, but was random with respect to phylogeny at low elevations. Once again this differed between the Core Eudicots and Monocots-ancient Dicots when analysed independently, the former being random with respect to phylogeny at all elevational ranges and the latter being clustered at high elevations. These results indicate that deep phylogenetic signal is driving the spatial distribution of angiosperm plants along elevational gradients in the Baetic mountains, and suggests that species occuring at high elevations, and thus likely more vulnerable to climate change, are non-random with respect to phylogeny.

Ozge Erisoz Kasap
Faculty of Science of Hacettepe University
Department of Biology
Turkey
Delineation of the sand fly (diptera: psychodidae) species within the ‘major group’ of turkey
poster D21SY30PS1351

Author(s): Erisoz Kasap, O, Votypka, J, Alten, B

Summary: 

Members of the subgenus Larroussius are the only proven vectors in the Mediterranean region of Leishmania infantum, the causative agent of visceral and cutaneous leishmaniasis in humans and canines. Sand fly species of this subgenus are grouped into four species complexes, namely Phlebotomus perniciosus, Phlebotomus perfiliewi, Phlebotomus ariasi and Phlebotomus major, which are considerably sympatric in their range of distribution from South West Asia to Northern Africa and Southern Europe. Among these complexes, the taxonomic status and distribution of the morphologically similar members of the Phlebotomus major complex in Turkey are unclear. To examine the utility of traditional morphological characters and molecular markers, sand flies were sampled from 90 localities in eleven different provinces covering a wide geographical range throughout Turkey. The morphometric variability was analyzed using multivariate analyses of twelve characters, while mitochondrial cytochrome b (Cyt b) and nuclear Elongation Factor 1a (EF 1-a) genes were used for molecular discrimination. Three distinct monophyletic lineages were identified based on the phylogenetic analysis of the combined data set of mitochondrial and nuclear gene regions, which were also supported by parsimony haplotype network analysis and AMOVA of Cyt b. The first lineage is restricted to south eastern Turkey and represents the species Phlebotomus syriacus, the second is present mostly in the westernmost and the easternmost localities and represents P. neglectus, and the third member of this complex is distributed across the mid-northern and mid-southern regions. None of the studied morphological characters were found to be sufficient to discriminate between these three members of the P. major s.l. complex; however their presence sympatrically in several localities supports their status as species rather than inter-population variability.

Francois Rousset
CNRS & Université Montpellier 2
Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution
France
Demographic inference of past variations in population size : what is the gain of combining different genetic markers such as DNA sequences, SNPs and microsatellites
poster D21SY30PS0772

Author(s): Rousset, F, Beeravolu, CR, Leblois, R, Pudlo, P

Summary: 

Stephens and Donnelly(2000) introduced an efficient importance sampling scheme for computing the likelihood surface of a genetic sample in coalescent-based models. This technique was further extended by De Iorio and Griffiths (2004a,b) for more general population frameworks and mutation models. For DNA sequence loci, the results of De Iorio and Griffiths (DIG) represent an improvement in terms of efficiency over those of Bahlo and Griffiths (2000) but haven't been tested beyond a single panmictic population. In this work, we implemented this approach and derived demographic inferences when modeling variation of the past size of a single population. Our method can analyse microsatellite loci evolving under a generalized stepwise mutation model, DNA sequences evolving under the infinitely-many-sites model and bi-allelic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Our method can also simultaneously analyse different types of markers. Using simulations, we tested how the number and types of markers considered, as well as combinations of different markers might influence the precision of demographic estimations. For those tests, we considered two typical demographic scenarios : (1) an old contraction followed by an expansion with large present population size, corresponding to typical post-glaciation recolonization scenarios; and (2) a recent strong contraction with small present population sizes, corresponding to typical scenarios studied in conservation biology.

References: Stephens, M., Donnelly, P., 2000. Inference in molecular population genetics. J. Roy. Statist. Soc. B 62, 605–655. Bahlo, M., Griffiths, R.C., 2000. Inference from gene trees in a subdivided population. Theor. Popn. Biol. 57, 79-95. De Iorio, M., Griffiths, R.C., 2004a. Importance sampling on coalescent histories, I. Adv. Appl. Probab. 36, 417–433. De Iorio, M., Griffiths, R.C., 2004b. Importance sampling on coalescent histories, II. Subdivided population models. Adv. Appl. Probab. 36, 434-454

Axelle Bouiges
EPHE - MNHN, Paris
France
Detecting recent changes in the demographic parameters of drosophilid populations from Western and central Africa
poster D21SY30PS0730

Author(s): Bouiges, A, Yassin, A, Ikogou, M, Lelarge, C, Sikoa, A, Mona, S, Veuille, M

Summary: 

Previous genetic studies showing evidence of past demographic changes in African drosophilids suggested these populations had strongly responded to Quaternary climate changes. We surveyed nine species of Zaprionus, a drosophilid genus mostly present in Africa, in forests located between southern Senegal and Gabon. The mitochondrial COI gene showed contrasted levels of sequence variation across species. Populations of the only cosmopolitan species of the genus, Z. indianus, and of its closely-related sibling species, Z. africanus, are highly polymorphic and appear to have undergone a continuous population expansion beginning about 130,000 years ago. Five less variable species probably underwent a population expansion beginning only about 20,000-30,000 years ago. One of them, Z. taronus, was significantly structured between forest blocks. The last two species were nearly monomorphic, probably due to infection by Wolbachia. These results are similar to those obtained in three species from the melanogaster subgroup. They may be typical of the responses of African drosophilid populations to glacial cycles.

Hans Stenøien
Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Museum of Natural History and Archaeology
Norway
Dispersal and survival in Pacific Rim peat mosses (Sphagnum)
poster D21SY30PS0789

Author(s): Stenøien, HK, Shaw, J, Shaw, B, Flatberg, KI

Summary: 

Mosses mostly exhibit broader distribution ranges than higher plants, coupled with limited morphological differentiation across large distances. This phenomenon has traditionally has been explained by slow evolution in mosses. It has recently been demonstrated that long-distance dispersal can be very high in transatlantic peat mosses (Sphagnum), and we ask whether transpacific peat mosses display similar high gene flow rates through time. We also ask where these stress-tolerant plants likely have survived climatic oscillations through Pleistocene.

Quentin Rougemont
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique
Ecologie des Forêts Prairies et Milieux Aquatiques
France
Dispersal, gene flow and ecological speciation in lampreys
talk D23SY30RT10:30R8

Author(s): Rougemont, Q, Gaigher, A, Launey, S, Lasne, E, Besnard, A, Evanno, G

Summary: 

In species with complex life histories estimates of dispersal rates can be obtained from genetic data. This approach allows comparing levels of intraspecific gene flow among species with different dispersal abilities. Lampreys evolved as either anadromous species (i.e. reproducing in freshwater but growing mainly at sea) with a parasitic lifestyle at sea or as non-parasitic freshwater resident species. Anadromous species home to their natal river or disperse to other rivers and should thus display higher level of gene flow among populations than resident species. The three European lamprey species allow testing this prediction: Lampetra planeri (LP) is resident in freshwater while L. fluviatilis (LF) and Petromyzon marinus (PM) are anadromous. LF and LP are morphologically and phylogenetically very similar and they may represent two ecotypes of a single species. We investigated the genetic structure among LP, LF and PM populations in France to i) test whether levels of gene flow are higher in anadromous than in resident species and ii) measure the level of gene flow among sympatric LF and LP populations. We used microsatellite loci to genotype 665 LF and LP and 380 PM individuals. Our results show a gradient of increasing genetic differentiation among lamprey species (PM < LF < LP) suggesting that populations of anadromous species are connected by higher levels of gene flow than LP populations. Interestingly, we detected some gene flow among sympatric LF and LP populations supporting the hypothesis that these species are actually two ecotypes of a single species possibly at an early stage of ecological speciation. In addition, estimates of genetic diversity were significantly higher in LF than LP populations. These results have important implications for conservation management through the definition of evolutionary significant units and species boundaries. They also suggest that the connectivity between putative LP and LF ecotypes should be maintained.

Wieslaw Babik
Jagiellonian University
Institute of Environmental Sciences
Poland
Divergence and gene flow in Lissotriton newts
talk D23SY30RT16:09R8

Author(s): Babik, W, Zielinski, P, Stuglik, MT

Summary: 

Historical patterns and consequences of genetic exchange between hybridizing species are poorly understood, but new genomic and analytical tools promise a rapid progress. We will present the results of research on historical demography and genome-wide patterns of gene flow between hybridizing newts Lissotriton montandoni (Lm) and L. vulgaris (Lv). These newts are characterized by a long history of genetic exchange, as evidenced by the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) data. Multiple, spatially and temporally distinct introgression events from Lv resulted in complete mtDNA replacement in Lm. We used various classes of molecular nuclear markers to obtain information about the extent and historical patterns of gene flow between the two species. Fifteen microsatellite loci and 139 coding SNPs surveyed in multiple populations demonstrated a very limited recent admixture in the nuclear genome. Genome-wide patterns of long-term gene flow were assessed by analyzing of over 300 000 SNPs derived from high-throughput transcriptome sequencing. The inferences based on the joint two-population allele frequency spectrum revealed an extensive, asymmetric gene flow from Lv to Lm and models allowing for demographic changes and temporal variation in the strength of gene flow provided best fit to the data. The species distribution modeling based on contemporary and historical climatic data suggests that temporal variation in gene flow between Lm and Lv may be linked to range changes the newts experienced during the Pleistocene climatic oscillations. Sequences of over 50 nuclear markers collected throughout the species ranges and analyzed within the coalescent framework provided evidence for genomic heterogeneity in gene flow. Our study demonstrates the complexity of long-term genetic exchange between hybridizing species and the power of new sequencing technologies for a comprehensive characterization of interspecific gene flow in non-model organisms possessing huge genomes.

Nick Levsen
Newcastle University
School of Biology
United Kingdom
Diversification and geographic progression in Populus (Salicaceae)
poster D21SY30PS0767

Author(s): Levsen, ND, Wu, Y, Liu, J, Wang, L, Olson, MS

Summary: 

The flowering plant genus Populus comprises ~30 species of deciduous, dioecious trees. Despite the economic, ecologic, and scientific importance of the genus, understanding of patterns of diversification within Populus remains poor. The difficulty in resolving relationships is attributable to widespread interspecific gene flow, recent and rapid diversification, and the previous application of a small number of insufficiently variable sequence markers. Using the published poplar genome to develop a large number of sequence markers, we generated and analyzed data from the chloroplast, mitochondrial, and nuclear genomes to estimate sectional and interspecific relationships, dates of divergence for major clades, lineage-specific substitution rates, patterns of geographic progression, and diversification rates within Populus.

Kadri Põldmaa
Institute of Ecology & Earth Sciences, University of Tartu
Botany
Estonia
Diversity, host associations and phylogeography of Hypomyces (Hypocreales, Ascomycota) causing the cobweb disease of wild and cultivated mushrooms
poster D21SY30PS1465

Author(s): Põldmaa, K, Tamm, H

Summary: 

Hypomyces represents the largest genus of ascomycetes parasitising on fruitbodies of fungi. Temperate species producing red pigments and having Cladobotryum anamorphs are common on species from five orders of Agaricomycetes. Isolates causing the cobweb disease of commercially cultivated mushrooms result in serious economic losses. We sequenced five gene regions in 90 wild strains and 30 strains from mushroom farms, isolated from Europe, North America, Africa, Asia, Australia and New Zealand. Multigene analyses reveal that five species include causal agents of the cobweb disease for which the name H. rosellus has widely been misused. The diversity in local species pool determines the species composition in mushroom farms of the same region. The majority of such isolates belong to H. odoratus, including a group of fungicide-resistant strains from Europe and North America sharing identical sequence data. Our results support the distinctness of five species but reveal the core species, H. rosellus to be paraphyletic, comprising six cryptic lineages. Hypomyces rosellus s. str. is characterised by wide dispersal and gene flow across Eurasia but does not occur in North America. Instead, the lineages from the West and the East Coast of USA appear distinct, having given rise to species inhabiting temperate Australasia. Separate lineages appear to be maintained by geographic isolation in these regions but by host specialisation in the species occurring sympatrically in Europe and Asia. Both specialist and generalist host use strategies have evolved in the group. The prevalence of clonal reproduction suggested for H. odoratus, could account for its success in mushroom farms facilitating the spread of fungicide resistance. tef1 and rpb2 can be recommended for species delimitation. Low variation, not exceeding 1% in the whole ingroup, argues against the use of ITS rDNA, the universal DNA barcode marker for fungi, for species recognition in this group.

Mónica Medrano Martínez
Estación Biológica de Doñana
Evolutionary Ecology
Spain
Drawing geographic and genetic boundaries in a plant biodiversity hotspot: cryptic Narcissus species from the southern Iberian Baetic Ranges
poster D21SY30PS0963

Author(s): Medrano Martínez, M, Herrera Maliani, CM

Summary: 

Species delimitation is a fundamental issue for many fields of biology and it is also a first step towards understanding evolutionary mechanisms generating diversification. Certain regions of the Mediterranean Basin preserve an extraordinarily rich flora in combination with an exceptional concentration of endemic taxa. Because the spatial genetic structure of populations often plays a key role in speciation, studies focusing on the genetic structure of closely related endemic taxa would be valuable to understand the evolutionary forces involved in the diversification processes. The Baetic mountain ranges, a remarkable biodiversity hotspot in the southeastern Iberian Peninsula, harbour several described trumpet daffodils (Narcissus L., section Pseudonarcissi DC.) that are narrow endemics, although considerable disagreement exists among plant taxonomists over the number and rank of taxa involved. We take advantage of amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) technique for delimiting taxa within this complex group of wild daffodils. In particular, we tested whether divergent genetic lineages exist rather than a single, genetically homogeneous entity. To this end, we analyzed AFLP data from a broad geographic sampling of 36 natural populations covering the whole distribution area and encompassing as much ecological and morphological diversity as possible. Results indicate that, despite their remarkable phenotypic homogeneity, trumpet daffodils occurring in the Baetic Ranges are a genetically highly heterogeneous group that can not be ascribed to one single taxon as sometimes proposed. On the contrary, four distinct genetic lineages can be identified within the area, whose distribution bears evident relationships with orographic regional features and ecological features of associated microhabitats. Our results emphasize that assessment of plant species richness by conventional methods may considerably underestimate the conservation value of biodiversity hotspot.

John Waller
Lund University
Department of Biology
Sweden
Ecology and sexual selection: the evolution of wing pigmentation and sexual dimorphism in calopterygid damselflies
poster D21SY30PS0347

Author(s): Waller, JT, Svensson, EI

Summary: 

Sexual selection is thought to lead to sexual dimorphism, following a transitional stage where both sexes have similar phenotypes due to a shared genetic architecture. In addition, sexual selection might facilitate both speciation and possibly also extinction. However, our knowledge about how the environment shapes sexual selection regimes and how ecology and sexual selection interact is still limited. Here we report the results from a study on the evolution of wing pigmentation in calopterygid damselflies. We investigated the effects of sexual selection on sexual dimorphism, speciation and extinction and the possible thermoregulatory consequences of wing pigmentation using a mixture of phylogenetic comparative analyses, field data and experiments . First, we traced the evolution of wing pigmentation and reconstructed ancestral states of male and female phenotypes. Our results indicate that clear wings are the ancestral state, that pigmentation is costly to females and sexual selection results in sexual dimorphism. We further demonstrate that pigmentation elevates speciation rates and tends to also elevate extinction rates. We document a significant biogeographic association with pigmented species primarily occupying northern temperate regions with cooler climates. Field observations and experiments on two temperate sympatric species suggest an interaction between pigmentation, thermoregulation and sexual selection, although body temperature is also likely to be influenced by other phenotypic traits such as body mass, microhabitat selection and thermoregulatory behaviors. Taken together, our results suggest an important role for wing pigmentation in speciation and sexual selection in males, but with a net cost to females. However, wing pigmentation does not necessarily increase ecological adaptation and species longevity, and its primary function therefore lies in sexual signalling and species recognition.

Fabien Laroche
AgroParistech - CEFE
Ecologie Evolutive
France
Effects of connectivity and size of local sites on species diversity-gene diversity correlations within (meta)communities : insights from neutral theories
poster D21SY30PS0327

Author(s): Laroche, F, Jarne, P, David, P, Lamy, T, Massol, F

Summary: 

In the last decade, there has been a growing interest in the simultaneous study of genetic diversity within populations and species diversity within associated communities. It has been argued that “neutral processes” such as drift and migration should similarly affect both organizational levels, thus contributing to positive covariation of diversities among sites, the so-called species-genetic diversity correlations (SGDCs). However, environmentally dependent competition and ecological characteristics of species may weaken, or even reverse, such SGDCs. Empirical studies have revealed both negative and positive SGDCs over a wide array of ecological situations, leading to discussions over the relative strength of “neutral” against “niche” processes in population / community construction. However, a proper quantitative neutral model including both levels has yet to be produced as a null model for SGDCs. We propose a unifying mainland-islands model with a sampling theory to explore the effects of sites’ connectivity and size, as well as the importance of intra-specific neutral mutation rate, on SGDCs. We show that variation in size and connectivity among sampled sites contributes to positive SGDCs through the relative strength of drift compared to migration. Moreover neutral gene mutation can significantly affect SGDCs, leading to negative correlations under realistic situations. We therefore argue that neutrality should not necessarily generate positive SGDC and provide some general guidelines for interpreting such joint patterns of diversity.

Catarina Mateus
University of Lisbon
Portugal
European brook and river lampreys, species or ecotypes: new insights using microsatellite loci
poster D21SY30PS0764

Author(s): Mateus, CS, Almeida, PR, Mesquita, N, Quintella, BR, Alves, J

Summary: 

The ice ages are known to be the most dominant palaeoclimatic feature occurring on Earth, producing severe climatic oscillations. The Pleistocene ice ages, together with recent processes, considerably shaped the distribution and population structure of several species. Lampreys constitute excellent models to study the colonization of freshwater systems, as they commonly appear in pairs of closely related species of anadromous versus freshwater resident adults, thus having the ability to colonize unexplored habitats, through the anadromous species, and establish freshwater resident derivates. We used microsatellite loci to investigate the spatial structure, patterns of gene flow and migration routes of Lampetra populations in Europe. Lampetra in Europe is represented by the migratory L. fluviatilis and four resident species, L. planeri, L. alavariensis, L. auremensis and L. lusitanica, the last three endemic to the Iberian Peninsula. We found that in this southern glacial refugium almost all sampled populations represent a distinct genetic cluster, showing high levels of allopatric differentiation, reflecting long periods of isolation. The more recently colonized populations from central and northern Europe are less divergent among them, as result of their more recent common ancestor. They are represented by fewer genetic clusters and lower diversity, and there is evidence of strong recent gene flow among the migratory populations. Finally, we found no signal of hybridization between sympatric populations of L. fluviatilis and L. planeri from the Iberian Peninsula, and population structure analysis revealed that they constitute two distinct genetic clusters, indicating that these species constitute two distinct taxa that diverged very recently, as previous results from genomic analysis.

Alexandro Rodríguez-Rojas
Freie Universität Berlin
Institute for Biology
Germany
Evolution of MutT protein and the emergence of the aerobic word
poster D21SY30PS1381

Author(s): Rodríguez-Rojas, A

Summary: 

The MutT protein family has been considered as an important protection against DNA damage and play an important role in protecting living form against oxidative stress in the aerobic word. Here, I have examined the evolution of this family under a new hypothesis of its function: the protection of the GTP binding protein from guanine oxidized nucleotide, 8-oxo-GTP. A phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the protein sequences of mutT members from different kingdoms. The phylogenetic analysis suggested that mutT gene evolved very early in the life history when the first organisms began to face de novo generated aerobic conditions. The evolutionary tree of MutT proteins also suggests, under the light of new findings, that this family was essential for the life evolution in the news aerobic times.

Lucie Mota
CFE, Centre for Functional Ecology
Department of Life Sciences
Portugal
Evolution of haploid chromosome numbers in the sunflower family
poster D21SY30PS1005

Author(s): Mota, L, Torices, R, Loureiro, J

Summary: 

The number of chromosomes is a remarkably dynamic feature in eukaryotic evolution. In angiosperms, a wide variation in chromosome numbers has already been reported. Considering this large variation, and the ample evidence that drastic genome rearrangements, such as fission, fusion or, more commonly, genome duplication, can contribute to speciation, it is of upmost importance to entangle the evolutionary direction and frequency of such phenomena. Many of the inferences of chromosome number evolution in plants are based on the concept of basic chromosome numbers (‘x’). However, a recent paper exploring chromosome numbers evolution in Araceae suggested that, due to this approach, most of studies might be biased towards low chromosomes numbers, producing an inaccurate view of the evolution of chromosome numbers in plants. Also, the use of probabilistic methods of recent models specific for chromosome evolution and of phylogenetic hypotheses might enable to obtain a more robust inference of the evolution of chromosome numbers. In the present study, it was our aim to study the evolution of chromosome numbers in the largest family of flowering plants, Asteraceae. In this family, evolutionary relationships among genera have been established, and a large data set of chromosome numbers is readily available in several web databases. For that, the haploid numbers of all taxa included in the largest phylogenetic hypothesis available for this family (over than 700 genera) were collected, and this data was used to infer the evolution of the haploid number using specific probabilistic models for chromosome numbers. The results of this study will be presented and discussed according with the current trends of chromosome evolution, and will enable to have a better understanding of the processes underlying changes in number of chromosomes, important for understanding speciation and adaptation within this family.

Jose Ruiz-Martin
University of Seville
Plant Biology and Ecology
Spain
Evolution of heterostyly across the phylogeny of South African flax species (Linum, Linaceae)
poster D21SY30PS0625

Author(s): Ruiz-Martin, J, Perez-Barrales, R, Midgley, J, Arroyo, J

Summary: 

Linum (Fam. Linaceae) is a subcosmopolitan genus, which includes about 250 species, and it is widely distributed in temperate and subtropical regions. The genus is organized in five taxonomic sections: Linum, Cathartolinum, Syllinum, Dasylinum and Linopsis. While all the sections are relatively well represented in the North of Africa, Linopsis appears to be the only section represented in the Southern Africa, and it is particularly abundant (in number of species) in South Africa (mostly in the Cape Region). South African Linum is represented by 14 species displaying a comparatively low variation in floral and vegetative traits, which has made difficult taxonomic treatment. Heterostyly has been known in Linum for long, but it was supposed to be restricted to Old World northern hemisphere. Our field sampling has shown that heterostyly and monomorphism is present in some populations and species in South Africa. Linum species of Cape Region are related with South American lineages where heterostyly is absent, rather than to Mediterranean *Linum, where this style polymorphism is common. We explore the extent to which heterostyly is a newly acquired trait in this southern lineage, and what are the ancestral and derived conditions within the variability of traits related to heterostyly shown by this small group of taxa. To do that, we present data on cpDNA and nuclear sequences from 50 populations of this group of species from South Africa and reconstruct trait evolution on the recovered phylogenetic relationships.

Jelena Rajkov
University of Montpellier II
Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier (ISEM)
France
Evolution of polyploidy and functional diploidization in sturgeon: microsatellite analysis in ten sturgeon species
poster D21SY30PS1464

Author(s): Rajkov, J, Shao, Z, Berrebi, P

Summary: 

Sturgeons are ‘living fossils’ among fishes and one of the most endangered groups of animals. Multiple polyploidization events make this group unique subject for studying evolution of polyploidy in animals. As most sturgeon species have gone through significant functional diploidization, two scales of ploidy levels can be distinguished: the ‘evolutionary scale’, which indicates the maximum ploidy level achieved, and the ‘recent scale’, which indicates current functional ploidy level. In this study we used microsatellite analysis to determine ploidy level and degree of functional diploidization in 10 sturgeon species from Europe and Asia. Maximal number of alleles per individual of a given species was assessed at 20 microsatellite loci. Our data on the percentage of disomic loci in different species suggest that functional diploidization is ongoing process in sturgeon. We observed lower level of diploidization in tetraploid species from the Atlantic clade than in the species from the Pacific clade, which can be explained by more recent genome duplication in tetraploid species from the Atlantic clade. Conservation management suffers a lack of appropriate DNA markers suitable for identification and description of hybridization in sturgeon species of different ploidy level, especially in Danube Delta. Only three diploid - Huso huso, Acipenser stellatus, A. ruthenus and one tetraploid sturgeon species - A. gueldenstaedtii are still reproducing in the Lower Danube River. They are threatened by hybridization among them, and with another non-native tetraploid species - A. baerii. As microsatellite markers are most suitable for hybrid description, we tried to detect microsatellite loci with disomic inheritance in polyploid species, A. gueldenstaedtii and A. baerii. While very low percentage of the markers showed disomic pattern in these two species, several of the markers appeared useful for A. stellatus, A. ruthenus and H. huso.

Maria Romeiras
IICT-Tropical Research Institute
JBT
Portugal
Evolutionary and biogeographic history of the Macaronesian Beta-Patellifolia species (Amaranthaceae): combining phylogenetic and ecological studies
poster D21SY30PS1022

Author(s): Romeiras, MM, Duarte, MC, Santos-Guerra, A, Moura, M, Batista, D, Vieira, A, Paulo, OS

Summary: 

Understanding the origins and diversification of oceanic island flora has long fascinated evolutionary biologists, ever since Darwin. The Macaronesian Islands, in the North-East Atlantic Region, are considered a hot-spot of biodiversity and contain a large proportion of endemic taxa. Recent molecular studies are providing insights into the patterns of colonization and radiation within the endemic plant species, while the relationships between the wild (i.e. endemics and natives) and the crop species have not been suitably addressed from an evolutionary perspective. The aim of this study is to understand the evolutionary and biogeographic history of the seven native species of Macaronesian Beta-Patellifolia species complex (Subfamily Betoideae, Amaranthaceae), which are ancestral species of the cultivated sugarbeet species (Beta vulgaris subsp. vulgaris). We compare the patterns of diversification identified for Macaronesia with those of the Mediterranean Region to assess to what extent patterns may be generalized across regions. Phylogenetic analyses based on nuclear (ITS) and plastid (rbcL, matK, trnH-psbA, trnL-F) DNA markers produced similar topologies that suggest a recent colonization event in the Macaronesian Region. Despite extensive sampling, low levels of sequence variation are consistently found throughout Beta spp., thus preventing complete resolution among taxa. Origins and diversification of these endemics, natives and crop species within the Macaronesian Region will be discussed in a biogeographic context.

Postaire Bautisse
FRE CNRS UR 3560 ECOMAR, Université de la Réunion
France
Evolutionnary dynamics in the Southwest Indian Ocean marine biodiversity hotspot: a perspective from the rocky shore gastropod genus Nerita
poster D21SY30PS0834

Author(s): Bautisse, P, Bruggemann, JH, Magalon, H, Faure, B

Summary: 

The southwestern Indian Ocean (SWIO) is a striking biodiversity hotspot. It hosts the second highest diversity of reef corals and associated reef biodiversity, only slighly below that of the much larger Indo-Malayan diversity hotspot, but with many marine endemics. The island archipelagoes with their diverse marine habitats constitute a natural laboratory for studying diversification processes. Rocky shores have been little studied in the SWIO region. This habitat contains high mollusks diversity, in particular gastropods. To explore the role of climatic and geologic factors in lineage diversification within the genus Nerita, we constructed a new phylogeny with an associated chronogram from two mitochondrial genes (cytochrome oxidase sub-unit 1 (CO1) and 16S rRNA (16S)), combining previously published and new data from samples collected throughout the region. Our results suggest that the regional diversification of Nerita is closely linked to tectonic events in the SWIO region. The Réunion mantle plume has been stable and active for >200 Ma, generating island archipelagoes, partly below sea-level today. Since the Miocene, sea-level fluctuations have intermittently exposed rocky shore habitats. These represent ephemeral stepping stones for intertidal gastropods, which have likely facilitated repeated colonization by Nerita populations from the Indo-Malayan region, leading to allopatric speciation. This highlights the importance of taking into account past climatic and geologic factors when studying diversification of highly dispersive tropical marine species. It also underlines the unique history of the SWIO region, harboring a unique marine biodiversity.

Kevin Donnelly
University of Edinburgh
Institute of Evolutionary Biology
United Kingdom
Exposing adaptive differentiation in ancient Scottish Pinewoods (Pinus sylvestris L.) via the controlled application of water-stress
poster D21SY30PS1227

Author(s): Donnelly, K, Cavers, S, Cottrell, J, Ennoss, RA

Summary: 

The Scottish Highlands represent a small, but climatically diverse geographical area, and native pinewoods are found on sites with marked variation in altitude, seasonal precipitation, and soil drainage. We wish to determine whether native pinewood fragments are locally adapted to their environments, as the discovery of adaptive variation will benefit forest management and conservation policy, particularly in the midst of ongoing climate change. Presently, we are evaluating possible adaptive differentiation between native populations in response to soil waterlogging by means of a glasshouse based randomised block design progeny-provenance trial. Via the controlled application of stress, it may be possible to identify genetic differences between populations that would be otherwise elusive. The trial consists of 432 four year-old saplings originating from nine remnant populations located across an environmental gradient in Scotland. Half of the saplings have been waterlogged (continuously submerged to 1 cm below soil surface); half grown under normal watering. To acquire data at the population level, we have employed a fast physiological phenotyping technique to characterise stress responses to waterlogging in terms of photochemical capacity (via chlorophyll fluorescence). Additionally, by means of carbon isotope analysis, provenances have been screened for genetically-determined differences in water regime, both prior to and following the stress treatment.
The completed data set provides evidence that the Scotland’s native pinewood remnants are genetically differentiated from one another, and furthermore that adaptive differences between populations in the glasshouse can be attributed to the prevailing conditions in their home provenances.

Neus Marí-Mena
Faculty of Sciences of the University of A Coruña
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology
Spain
Fine-scale spatial genetic structure of a protected forest insect
poster D21SY30PS1092

Author(s): Marí-Mena, N, Segelbacher, G, Lopez-Vaamonde, C, Vila, M

Summary: 

Understanding the spatial genetic structure of populations can provide insight into ecological and/or evolutionary processes, thus enabling conservation decisions about a given species. We characterised the genetic structure of the Spanish Moon Moth Graellsia isabellae as revealed by multilocus (9 microsatellites) genotyping of 290 males sampled at the the Pyrenean National Park of Ordesa and surrounding buffer zone (a total of 13 sites separated by up to 28 km). Despite the overall low genetic differentiation and similar levels of diversity among sites, we found (i) significant west-east population structure as indicated by Bayesian clustering methods, (ii) a cryptic barrier to gene flow around one particular sampling site (Ordesa), and (iii) directional gene flow towards a second locality (Bujaruelo). Pairwise FST values showed that mountains prevent direct gene flow between the western and easternmost sites. However, low migrations rates were detected between intermediate sites (southern side of mountains), resulting in a clinal genetic variation throughout the Park, confirmed by isolation by distance analysis and individual membership coefficients to the clusters. We have analysed the patchy distribution and logging/reforestation history of the larval host plant (Pinus sylvestris) as explanatory factor for the cryptic barrier. Lastly, the combination of spatial configuration of woodland patches plus predominant wind direction is put forward to account for the directional migration toward Bujaruelo, a locality in the buffer zone near the National Park. Our work highlights the importance that buffer areas have to preserve high genetic diversity of forest insects within a national park.

Eduardo Marabuto
Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon
Department of Animal Biology
Portugal
From Africa and back again: biogeography and differentiation of a specialist west-Mediterranean butterfly in a fragmented glacial refuge
talk D23SY30RT11:42R8

Author(s): Marabuto, E, Rebelo, M, Paulo, OS

Summary: 

The Mediterranean area is well known for retaining and generating biodiversity during climate and habitat shifts taking place since the end of the Miocene. This important biodiversity hotspot is both the source and the result of a complex process of differentiation and interaction between evolving lineages and their changing environment. However, regarding stationary Mediterranean specialists, which are expected to benefit and expand northwards with climate amelioration, little is still known. Using the butterfly Euchloe tagis, an Atlanto-Mediterranean ecological specialist with a fragmented and restricted distribution, this study attempts at answering pertinent biogeographic aspects on the species and its interaction with the changing ecosystem. We sequenced a 599bp barcode region fragment of the COI gene from all major populations to better understand current its genetic patterns and evolutionary history. Main results suggest an origin in North Africa, from where the sister species Euchloe pechi is endemic. While one of the Moroccan populations diverged earlier from the remaining stock, all remaining are more closely related despite the existence of differentiated major mitochondrial lineages. It seems that Iberia has played a pivotal role in the generation of diversity in this species: two consistent genetic clusters are partly sympatric whereas French and Italian populations are considerably different. The second Moroccan population from the Rif Mountains shows little segregation from French samples and this issue is discussed on a phylogeographic framework supported by molecular-clock analysis. This pattern suggests this species experienced polycentric refugia during climate cycles, leading to such genetic structure and a putative re-colonization of Africa. Moreover, the neutral genetic pattern reported in this study challenges current taxonomy based on morphological differentiation and suggests a more complex evolution of this species.

Petr Kotlík
Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics AS CR
Czech Republic
Functional haemoglobin divergence between bank vole populations of different refugial origins
talk D21SY30RT17:45R2

Author(s): Kotlík, P, Markova, S, Stratil, A, Slechta, V, Searle, JB

Summary: 

Much has been learned about the post-glacial partitioning of phylogeographic lineages in various species, yet little is known of the extent to which their distributions have been determined by adaptive differences. We have addressed this issue by studying the genetic basis of haemoglobin (Hb) polymorphism in the bank vole (Clethrionomys glareolus). It is evident that at the end of the last glaciation, bank voles colonized Britain from two different source populations that were already isolated and genetically divergent. Regions colonised by the two lineages can be identified from mtDNA phylogeography and are fixed for different electrophoretically detectable Hb variants. Since modifications of Hb structure and function often play a key role in adaptation to climate and altitude, it has been suggested that the geographical pattern of bank vole Hb variation in Britain may reflect some type of environmental selection favouring the HbS type in the north and the HbF type in the south. We have cloned the genes coding for bank vole Hb by RACE-PCR and assessed their relative expression by RNA-Seq, in order to determine whether the alpha or beta chain polymorphism, and how many loci, underlie the two Hb variants. The results demonstrate that a single amino acid replacement mutation, 52(D3)Ser/Cys, in the major expressed beta globin gene underlies the difference between HbS and HbF. The same polymorphism segregates also at the second, minor expressed beta globin gene, suggesting a possible functional interplay between the two paralogs. The exposed location of the thiol group of 52(D3)Cys on the surface of HbF molecule and the ability to form intermolecular disulphide bonds are indicative of its reactivity and therefore potential involvement in physiologically relevant redox reactions. We suggest that antioxidant potential of the reactive Cys in HbF may convey selective advantage over HbS and contribute to the geographical partitioning of the two bank vole lineages in Britain.

Anja Westram
University of Sheffield
Animal & Plant Sciences
United Kingdom
Genetic basis and geographical patterns of adaptive divergence in an intertidal snail
talk D23SY30RT10:54R8

Author(s): Westram, AM, Galindo, J, Grahame, JW, Butlin, RK

Summary: 

At the onset of ecological speciation with gene flow, an ancestral species splits into ecotypes with incomplete reproductive isolation. In multiple systems, ecotypes coexist in many geographical locations, raising the question whether the genetic basis of divergence is identical across the whole range. While some loci may be under divergent selection on large geographical scales (reflecting a spread of favourable alleles), others might be involved in divergence only locally (potentially causing “parallel evolution”). Geographically close locations with a shared colonization history may be expected to share more divergently selected loci than distant ones. Our project aims at estimating the relative contribution of globally and locally selected alleles to divergence between ecotypes of the marine snail Littorina saxatilis. Using snails from Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom, we performed an RNA-sequencing experiment and analysed the resulting allele frequency data. Because Swedish and British locations probably have a shared postglacial colonization history, we expected them to share loci under divergent selection. We found a large number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which showed differentiation between ecotypes only locally, indicating parallel evolution. In Spain there were more SNPs with significant differentiation between ecotypes than in Sweden and the UK, potentially reflecting stronger divergence between ecotypes. While transcriptome-wide differentiation between Swedish and UK samples was lower than their differentiation from Spain, we did not find a higher number of shared loci under selection. However, we identified >1000 SNPs showing increased differentiation between ecotypes across all three countries, suggesting a shared origin of divergence. Our results contribute to the understanding of the genome as a mosaic of loci with partly independent evolutionary histories and demonstrate how genomic patterns of selection vary across space.

Magdalena Swislocka
Institute of Biology University of Bialystok
Department of Vertebrate Zoology
Poland
Genetic diversity of a relic moose population, Alces alces in the Biebrza Valley, NE Poland
poster D21SY30PS0512

Author(s): Swislocka, M, Ratkiewicz, M, Duda, N, Czajkowska, M

Summary: 

Moose (Alces alces) are highly mobile mammals that occur across arboreal regions of North America, Europe and Asia. Hundertmark et al. (2002) identified three distinct mtDNA lineages of moose in these regions. The distribution of these lineages indicated a geographic structure associated with a glacial history. To examine the genetic diversity and population structure of moose in northeastern Poland we analyzed mtDNA sequences of 1747 bp long (control region combined with cytochrome b) of 500 individuals from 13 populations. Our study revealed presence of 12 haplotype belonging to the European lineage, from which only five haplotypes were early detected by Hundertmark et. al. (2002) exclusively among moose from Scandinavian Peninsula. The haplotype (h) and nucleotide (p) diversity values for analyzed moose samples were respectively 0,76 and 1,2%. Altogether, 27 sites were variable and all substitutions appeared to be transitions. In our study the haplotype H1 was mainly present in the Biebrza Valley and it was divergented from the remaining European haplotypes. Phylogenetic relationships were computed using a Neighbor-Joining (NJ) and a Maximum Likelihood (ML) trees. In both analysis the clade contained the unique haplotype H1 from the Biebrza Valley was the most distinct within the European lineage. Net sequence divergence between these clade and the others European haplotype amount 1,4%, which means moose from the Biebrza Valley separated 23000 years ago, eg during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). We also found that genetic differentiation between several moose populations in northeastern Poland was great, for example the ?ST value between two neighbouring populations: from the Biebrza Valley and the Augustowska Forest was 0.55. In addition, we analyzed others classes of molecular markers: 11 microsatellite loci and markers located on Y chromosome (SRY and YCATs) which also confirmed relic character of moose from the Biebrza Valley.

Olivia Charrier
Université Paul Sabatier
Biology
France
Genetic structure of an alpine shrub Rhododendron ferrugineum (Ericaceae)
poster D21SY30PS0462

Author(s): Charrier, O, Escaravage, N, Pornon, A

Summary: 

Genetic variation within plant species is determined by a number of different factors such as reproductive mode, breeding system or life history traits. In alpine regions, the combined environmental changes across altitude and longitude can result in complex local patterns of genetic variation. Due to the uncertainty of plant responses to climate change, an understanding of current distribution patterns of population genetic diversity is fundamental for establishing management strategies for resilient species. Pyrenees are a mountain range stretching across the isthmus that lies between the Iberian Peninsula and the rest of the European continent. Acting as a biogeographical barrier, they are the southern limit of numerous species. Both influences of the Mediterranean Sea (east) and the Atlantic Ocean (west) allowed refuge zones during the glacial periods. This can lead to specific genetic pattern of Pyrenean species. This work focuses on R. ferrugineum which is an alpine shrub distributed in the Pyrenees, Alps and Jura. R. ferrugineum is an entomogamous species with a mixed mating system. To assess the genetic structure within and among populations we genotyped individuals from 33 populations (647 ind.) at 27 microsatellites loci. We found a structuration with 5 genetic clusters along a longitudinal gradient across the Pyrenees. This structuration is supported by Mantel tests that revealed a positive relationship between genetic distance matrix and geographic distance matrix across populations located on the Pyrenees. Populations from the Alps and Jura formed an additional cluster genetically close to the easternmost Pyrenean populations. Therefore, Pyrenean populations may derive from Alpine populations and appeared to have colonized the Pyrenees from east to west (gene flow analyzes). The high structuration across the Pyrenees may be explained by a strong level of clonality and autogamy in this species but also by some historical and colonization events.

Katarzyna Jadwiszczak
University of Bialystok, Institute of Biology
Department of Genetics and Evolution
Poland
Glacial and postglacial history of Betula humilis in Poland and Belarus
poster D21SY30PS0398

Author(s): Jadwiszczak, KA, Banaszek, A

Summary: 

Trees and shrubs of the Betula genus inhabit diverse habitats in the Northern Hemisphere. In Europe, there are two tree birch species: Betula pendula and B. pubescens, and two shrub birches: B. nana and B. humilis. Both palaeontological and genetic investigations have shown that B. pendula and B. pubescens could have survived the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) not only in southern European refugia but also at higher latitudes and after Holocene warming a rapid recolonisation occurred. The boreal shrub B. nana could have also existed in a periglacial area during the last glaciation. It is very difficult to reconstruct the glacial and postglacial history of B. humilis using solely palaeoecological data because the macrofossil record is rather scarce, and the pollen of this species is classified as B. nana type. The aim of the present study is to analyse variation of chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) haplotypes of B. humilis in order to describe the glacial and post-glacial history of the species in Poland and Belarus. Investigations were conducted in 25 populations of B. humilis. In total, 21 haplotypes were found but only two of them occurred with high frequencies. Clear predominance of two haplotypes in the studied area could be explained in terms of recolonisation from two distinct refugia. A weak genetic structure within the area populated by B. humilis has suggested that the species could have survived the LGM at higher latitudes. A glacial refugium of B. humilis was probably located in eastern Europe, another one could be situated in the Alps or the Carpathians. Low level of genetic diversity has not confirmed a hypothesis about B. humilis glacial isolate in south-eastern Poland. In turn, high haplotypic diversity has been revealed in some populations of B. humilis in north-eastern Poland and central Belarus. This pattern can likely be explained as a contact zone between different phylogeographic lineages.

Antigoni Kaliontzopoulou
CIBIO/UP, Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos
Portugal
Habitat use and sexual dimorphism in Podarcis wall lizards: micro- and macroevolutionary patterns of morphological variation
poster D21SY30PS0846

Author(s): Kaliontzopoulou, A, Adams, DC, Carretero, MA

Summary: 

Understanding how phenotypic diversity evolves is a major objective of evolutionary biology. Iberian and North African Podarcis are a lizard group of remarkable morphological diversity, thus providing an intriguing model system for studying the causes underlying phenotypic evolution. We examined body size and shape variation at the individual and evolutionary lineage level in relation to sexual dimorphism (SD) and habitat use, to trace the potential effects of sexual and natural selection on different morphological traits. The results obtained indicate that SD is a major source of phenotypic variation in this group, with significant effects on all examined variables at the individual level. Habitat use also explains large part of the variation observed at the individual level, but surprisingly is not associated to body size and limb length variation, as has been the case in other lizard groups. Comparative analyses of trait evolution using the most recent mtDNA phylogeny of the group indicate a significant difference between habitats in male head shape, where males of saxicolous species exhibit relatively flatter and shorter heads than ground-dwelling ones. Such variation is also reflected on macroevolutionary patterns of sexual dimorphism, which also varies across habitats, possibly indicating an interaction between sexual and natural selection. Comparison of evolutionary rates between habitats showed that male head shape has evolved about 9 times faster in saxicolous species. Remarkably, limb length was not associated to habitat use at the macroevolutionary level, contradicting predictions of the ecomorphological paradigm and previous observations on other lizard groups. Indeed, a comparison of evolutionary rates across traits demonstrated that head dimensions have evolved much faster in this group of lizards as compared to limb length. Together our results shed new light to the evolution of the remarkable morphological diversity of this lizard group.

K. Emily Knott
University of Jyväskylä
Biological & Environmental Science
Finland
High relatedness and chaotic genetic patchiness of a polychaete in a heterogeneous estuarine landscape
poster D21SY30PS0943

Author(s): Knott, K, Kesäniemi, J, Banta, GT, Hansen, BW

Summary: 

Population genetic structure in marine organisms frequently defies clear explanation and is described as chaotic genetic patchiness. In these cases, patterns of genetic structure may be determined by barriers to dispersal that are difficult to observe, e.g., those created by variable oceanic currents or by the behavior of dispersive larvae and adults. We examined population genetic structure using seven microsatellite loci in the polychaete worm, Pygospio elegans, sampled from 16 sites in a heterogeneous estuarine landscape in Denmark. Most samples showed significant pairwise Fst and Jost’s D, and there was no indication of isolation by distance. Using GESTE, we calculated sample-specific Fst values, which characterize how the samples differ from the metapopulation as a whole. Variation in these estimates was not explained by environmental variables, including salinity, substrate, and distance from the mouth of the estuary. The samples most dissimilar in terms of observed allele frequencies, and those with high estimated numbers of siblings, had larger sample-specific Fst. We hypothesize that polymorphism in the developmental mode of P. elegans, which produces both dispersive planktonic larvae and non-dispersive larvae brooded by the mother, contributes to chaotic genetic patchiness in this estuarine landscape. The large numbers of siblings estimated within samples could reflect high local recruitment of brooded larvae, despite effective dispersal and high gene flow via planktonic larvae.

Ayana Martins
Universidade de São Paulo
Instituto de Biociências, Departamento de Ecologia
Brazil
How do different geographical barriers affect ring species formation and persistence?
talk D23SY30RT18:33R8

Author(s): Martins, AB, De Aguiar, MAM, Bar-Yam, Y

Summary: 

Ring species are spatially extended populations that have expanded around a geographical barrier in such a way that the two terminal forms, which meet after many generations, have become reproductively isolated, despite on-going gene flow around the ring. They represent a unique opportunity to study the role of geographical features in speciation. Here we simulate the evolution of ring species using a neutral agent-based model with sexual reproduction, mutation and dispersal. Mating is constrained by a mating area and a critical genetic distance, above which other individuals are no longer considered potential mates. We show that ring species are rare and often unstable to speciation or mixing. However, they can persist for extended times depending on the fine-tuning population, individual, and landscape parameters. The genetic restriction in mating leads to selection against rare types in the area of secondary contact, which contributes to ring species persistence. For the greenish warblers, one of the best documented ring species known to date, our analysis implies that the expanded area near the point of secondary contact is important for extending the duration of the ring. Decreasing the habitable area of the region of secondary contact increases genetic fluctuations there and facilitates the reversal of incomplete speciation, demonstrating the decisive role played by specific landscape features. Our results also demonstrate that geographical barriers can cause speciation even when they do not cause complete isolation.

Emiliano Trucchi
University of Oslo
IBV
Norway
How to use RADseq data to infer past demography in a multi-locus coalescent-based framework
talk D23SY30RT15:12R8

Author(s): Trucchi, E, Gratton, P, Le Bohec, C, Stenseth, NC

Summary: 

Next-generation sequencing (NGS) methods that allow for genome scan in multiple individuals are expected to trigger a new golden age in phylogeography, phylogenetics and population genetics likely merging these fields with ecological genomics. Neutral and adaptive processes are now likely to be addressed with the same toolkit of molecular markers. However, the implementation of whole-genome data in ecological adaptations studies is far advanced than in the investigation of neutral evolutionary dynamics. This is mainly due to the most common output data type of most NGS methods (e.g. unlinked SNPs) in contrast with the historical importance of using gene trees, mainly through coalescent-based analytical approaches, in phylogeography and phylogenetics. Nevertheless, solutions that can make the set of excellent statistical tools for DNA sequences analysis, employed in phylogeography and phylogenetics so far, available to deal with NGS data are of the utmost importance. Here we will show how RAD sequencing data can be used to address classical questions in phylogeography and we will also propose a novel method to use RADseq data to infer past demography in a coalescent-based framework. Two applications of the proposed approach will be shown: i) the analysis the past population history of a king penguin (Aptenodytes patagonicus) colony breeding on Crozet archipelago and ii) the study of the past evolutionary dynamics of two populations of African porcupines (Hystrix cristata and H. africaeaustralis).

Ana Amaral
Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon
Centre for Environmental Biology
Portugal
Hybridization in a recently rediscovered dolphin species, Stenella clymene
poster D21SY30PS0916

Author(s): Amaral, AR, Lovewell, G, Coelho, M, Amato, G, Rosenbaum, HC

Summary: 

Hybridization has long been considered to play a major role in the evolution of plant and animal taxa, occurring as a simple exchange of interspecific genetic material, or even originating new species. In mammals, reports of hybridization and hybrid speciation are particularly rare when compared to other taxa like insects and fish, which is either a consequence of unfavorable ecological and physiological conditions, or a lack of empirical studies. In cetaceans, there have been several reports of hybridization in captivity and a few others in the wild. The prominent karyological uniformity found to exist in these species may justify the potential to produce viable hybrid offspring more easily than other mammals. In this study we use sequences from one mitochondrial and six nuclear DNA regions in order to understand the evolutionary origin of the Clymene dolphin, Stenella clymene, which is thought to have originated through hybridization among two other species, Stenella coeruleoalba and Stenella longirostris. We report a discrepancy of results between markers, with the mitochondrial genome of S. clymene being more similar to that of S. coeruleoalba, and the nuclear genome being more similar to S. longirostris. We have also found two S. clymene x S. longirostris hybrids, confirmed with genetics and morphological characters. We suggest that introgressive hybridization and hybrid speciation have been important phenomena in the origin of the Clymene dolphin. Overall, our results have strong implications not only for the clarification of the evolutionary relationships among species of the genus Stenella, but also for our understanding of hybrid speciation and the establishment of reproductive isolation barriers in mammals.

Linn Groeneveld
University of Göttingen
Courant Research Center Geobiology
Germany
I have a gut feeling: putative sulfide-dependent distribution of bacterial mollicute gut symbionts in Niphargus amphipods
poster D21SY30PS0540

Author(s): Groeneveld, LF, Wilkening, A, Dattagupta, S

Summary: 

Chemosynthetic symbioses were first discovered in the 1970s at hydrothermal vents in the deep sea. Subsequently, they were found to occur in a wide variety of marine environments, ranging from shallow-water coastal sediments, wood and whale falls, to cold seeps. Only recently a chemosynthetic symbiosis was identified in a freshwater habitat. An ectosymbiosis between an invertebrate host (Niphargus sp.; Amphipoda) and sulfur-oxidizing bacteria of the genus Thiothrix was identified in an Italian sulfidic cave system. These caves are isolated from surface photosynthetic primary production and demonstrate many geochemical and ecological similarities to marine vents and seeps. Potential symbioses in these freshwater environments in general and with Niphargus sp. as the host in particular, have not been fully explored. Here we show the occurrence of gut symbionts of the bacterial class Mollicutes in European freshwater Niphargus amphipods. By sequencing 16S rRNA gene clones of Niphargus gut DNA extract, we identified three clades of Mollicutes, which are closely related to mollicute bacteria found in the gut of the marine hydrothermal vent shrimp Rimicaris exoculata. It has been hypothesized that these bacteria might play a role in host nutrition or detoxification, although to date there is no direct evidence. We are exploring the presence/absence pattern of the mollicute bacteria in the gut of various Niphargus species from multiple European cave systems in relation to geochemical parameters, such as sulfide levels. If mollicute gut symbiont presence correlates with a sulfidic host habitat, both in marine and freshwater habitats, a role of the mollicute bacteria in either nutrition or detoxification of their hosts seems likely.

Gerald Heckel
University of Bern
Institute of Ecology and Evolution
Switzerland
Ignoring heterozygosity biases phylogenomic estimates of divergence times: implications for the evolutionary history of Microtus voles
talk D23SY30RT14:24R8

Author(s): Heckel, G, Excoffier, L, Lischer, HEL

Summary: 

Challenges for the phylogenetic reconstruction of the evolutionary history of closely related organisms may arise from the presence of unsorted lineages and a relatively high proportion of heterozygous sites that are often difficult to incorporate in the analysis. Here we performed a phylogenomic reconstruction of the evolutionary history of the common vole (Microtus arvalis) in Europe with a special focus on the influence of heterozygosity on the estimation of intra-specific divergence. We provide a novel strategy to integrate heterozygous information in existing phylogenetic programs by repeated random haplotype sampling (RRHS) from sequences with multiple unphased heterozygous sites. We evaluate the impact of full, partial or excluded information from heterozygous sites in tree reconstructions on divergence time estimates. All results consistently show four deep and strongly supported evolutionary lineages in our genomic vole sequence data. These lineages diverged at the end of or shortly after the last glacial maximum based on a calibration using radiocarbon-dated archaeological information. However, the incorporation of information from heterozygous sites had a significant impact on absolute and relative branch length estimations. Ignoring heterozygous information led to overestimation of divergence times between the evolutionary lineages of M. arvalis. Computer simulations confirmed the high power of our empirical data set to recover the evolutionary history of the species and allowed to examine potential sources of bias in different analytical approaches. In general, the exclusion of heterozygous sites from evolutionary analysis may cause biased and misleading divergence time estimates particularly in closely related taxa.

Erwan Quéméré
INRA
France
Influence of seascape and migratory patterns on coastal brown trout genetic structure (Salmo trutta)
talk D22SY30RT10:54R9

Author(s): Quéméré, E, Roussel, J, Baglinière, J, Launey, S

Summary: 

Understanding how anthropogenic and natural factors influence movement patterns of wild organisms is of prime importance in conservation biology. Most animal species live in spatially and temporally heterogeneous landscapes where resources are unequally spread. Consequently, individuals must adjust their migratory behaviour to avoid adverse environmental conditions and reach suitable areas for feeding and breeding. In the present work, we studied populations of brown trout (Salmo trutta) from the rivers of the French Channel coast that display a large continuum of migratory strategies from complete freshwater residence to anadromy (sea trout). To clarify the influence of life-history strategies and natural environmental factors on population connectivity, we used an integrated approach that combines GIS data on landscape structure, patterns of life history variation and inferences of dispersal based on neutral genetic markers. Landscape genetic analyses revealed a hierarchical genetic structure with two main genetic units corresponding to the eastern and western marine ecoregions of the English Channel delineated by the Cotentin peninsula. Within these two clusters, the spatial variation of migratory strategies appears to influence the patterns of isolation by distance and we observed a latitudinal increase in population genetic isolation. Moreover, least-cost path modelling suggests that sea trout preferentially disperse through soft bottom areas in brackish and shallow waters where they find their favourite prey. Overall, these results point out the need to take into account the spatial variability of life history and landscape heterogeneity at large scale when studying the ecology and evolution of long distance migratory animals.

Charlotte De Busschere
Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences
Entomology
Belgium
Inter and intra island introgression in a wolf spider radiation from the Galápagos, and its implications for parallel evolution
poster D21SY30PS0804

Author(s): De Busschere, C, Van Belleghem, SM, Hendrickx, F

Summary: 

Parallel radiations within island systems are often assumed to follow a simple scenario in which single colonization events are followed by in-situ divergence. However, subsequent gene exchange after the initial colonization and during the divergence process might have evolutionary impacts on species radiations. First, gene exchange among ecologically similar species from different islands may lead to introgression of adaptive genetic variation and, hence, influence the parallel divergence process. Second, hybridization events among ecologically different species living on the same island may influence their genetic relationships due to the introgression of neutral genetic variation. In this study, we estimate levels of gene exchange within a wolf spider radiation of the genus Hogna from the Galapagos, wherein habitat specialization into ‘high elevation’ and ‘coastal dry’ species apparently evolved repeatedly on two islands. By using a multilocus approach we show that low levels of inter island and relatively higher levels of intra island introgression have most likely been prevalent within this spider radiation. Using these estimates, we demonstrate by means of a coalescence simulation that adaptive gene genealogies, expected to better reflect the adaptive divergence process, may strongly differ from gene genealogies of neutral genes. As species phylogenies within radiations are frequently used to infer the divergence pattern, interspecific gene flow should not be neglected when interpreting parallel trait evolution.

Andreia Miraldo
University of Helsinki
Department of Biosciences
Finland
Large body size as a key innovation facilitating rapid radiation and geographical expansion in Malagasy dung beetles
talk D21SY30RT16:09R2

Author(s): Miraldo, A, Hanski, IA

Summary: 

Dung beetles form highly competitive communities and therefore are likely to show patterns of diversification consistent with the diversity-dependent model of radiation, whereby the progressive filling of ecological space, characterized by an initial rapid accumulation of lineages, is followed by a slowdown in net diversification rate. In such cases, further diversification will only be possible following a “key innovation”, which would decouple the rate of diversification in the “innovative” lineage from that in the main radiation. Here, we integrate a well-represented species-level dated phylogeny of the most recent but large dung beetle radiation in Madagascar (Nanos-Apotolamprus radiation, Canthonini) with data on species’ geographical ranges, abundances and body sizes. Results demonstrate an overall decrease of lineage accumulation through time. However, we observe a significant secondary burst of speciation associated with one clade composed of large-bodied species (Clade L, for large), consistent with the “key innovation” model. The secondary increase in diversification rate is associated with a significant increase in body size and striking geographical expansions. It is common in dung beetle communities for large species to be competitively superior to small ones in exploitative competition and hence we suggest that a significant increase in body size has allowed the large species in Clade L to diversify independently of the species in the rest of the lineage. Furthermore, we show that the increased speciation rate in Clade L is most probably associated with competitive release. This is supported by the observation that the total biomass of many species in Clade L is far greater than the total biomass in any of the remaining species. Finally, species in this successful clade have small but almost entirely allopatric distributions: the increase in species number is hence importantly due to divergence in their geographical occurrences.

Reeta Sharma
Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência
Portugal
Low genetic diversity in Bornean elephants (Elephas maximus borneensis) confirmed by high throughput sequencing methods
poster D21SY30PS0978

Author(s): Sharma, R, Goossens, B, Kun-Rodrigues, C, Teixeira, T, Othman, N, Boone, JQ, Jue, NK, Obergfell, C, O’Neill, RJ, Chikhi, L

Summary: 

The Bornean elephant is a subspecies of mainland Asian elephant which differs from other subspecies in its morphology and behaviour. Its distribution is restricted to the North of Borneo where the estimated population size is around 2,000. They are classified as endangered according to the IUCN Red list of threatened species. The main threats identified are habitat fragmentation and habitat loss due to oil palm plantations. Modern analytical methods for population genetics inference are expected to provide more accurate results when data from multiple genome-wide loci are analysed. To study the effect of recent fragmentation on genetic diversity of Bornean elephants, we developed panels of genomic markers (microsatellites and SNPs) using two different sequencing platforms, the Roche 454 (shotgun) and Illumina (Restriction site associated DNA, RAD). Approximately, 6,683 (shotgun) and 14,724 (RAD) SNPs were detected within our elephant sequence dataset. We found around 2000 SNPs as potential candidates for genotyping assay. A subset of SNPs were tested against a panel of seven elephant blood samples which resulted in a successful validation rate of 83 to 94% and 17% of the loci were found to be polymorphic with a low diversity (He=0.051, Ho=0.057). We have started to validate these genomic markers on fecal samples of Bornean elephants from different regions of northern Borneo to study patterns of genetic diversity and differentiation across the species range. Different numbers of microsatellites were also identified through these techniques. All the microsatellites tested were monomorphic in the Bornean samples but were polymorphic in a small sample of another Asian elephant subspecies. Our project is one of the still few that have identified genomic markers in a threatened non-model species and that demonstrate the utility of high throughput sequencing technologies as a starting point for the development of genomic tools for a species with low genetic diversity.

Francisco Pina-Martins
Faculty of Sciences, University of Lisbon / University of Aveiro
Center for Environmental Biology / CESAM
Portugal
Making the best of your 454 dataset using the 4Pipe4 analysis pipeline – from an unknown genome to a detailed SNPs analysis: A case study with a Quercus suber dataset
talk D23SY30RT14:00R8

Author(s): Pina-Martins, F, Vieira, BM, Seabra, SG, Batista, D, Paulo, OS

Summary: 

The widespread use of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) techniques and its application to non model organisms provided biologists with large amounts of genetic data and the ability to address problems which were untreatable just a few years ago. However, the frequent lack of reference genomes on non-model organisms usually creates difficulties to researchers when trying to answer specific genetic questions, such as finding candidate genes or looking for intra and inter-population variation. For instance, mining SNPs in NGS datasets of anonymous pooled individuals that cannot be compared to a reference is still not a simple task. Here is described 4Pipe4, a NGS data analysis pipeline, optimized for SNP mining in the aforementioned datasets, particularly on Roche 454 data. In order to assess its efficiency, a dataset of anonymous pooled individuals of Quercus suber (Cork Oak), which does not have a reference genome available, was analysed with 4Pipe4, and a subset of tenths of SNPs detected by the pipeline was randomly selected and sequenced in an array for validation. The results of the genotyping array were explored to: a) provide insights on population structure and gene flow patterns and b) make an association study with environmental factors such as temperature, precipitation or drought periods. This combined approach of 454/genotyping array with the 4Pipe4 pipeline proved to be a very efficient and cost effective way to obtain validated and mapped SNPs from orthologous regions, for population genomics studies.

Fernanda Fontes
Institute of Biology - University of Campinas
Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents
Brazil
Microscale phylogeographical study of Aglaoctenus lagotis (Araneae, Lycosidae), a Neotropical web spider
poster D21SY30PS1129

Author(s): Fontes, FVHM, Solferini, VN, Macrini, C

Summary: 

The Atlantic forest extends along the Brazilian coast, characterized by a high species diversity and endemism. Around the city of Campinas (São Paulo) this forest covers two neighbor geomorphological units, the Atlantic Plateau and the Peripheral Depression, that, besides altitude, present different soil composition and microclimate conditions. Our aim was to investigate if populations of the two units might have different evolutionary histories. Aglaoctenus lagotis is a web builder spider, found in the Atlantic Forest as well as in the Brazilian savanna and Pantanal. We sampled 9 populations distributed over the two geomorphological units. A 521 bp region of the mitochondrial gene COI was sequenced for 96 individuals from the 9 populations and eight microsatellite loci were analyzed for five populations. The haplotype network revealed two groups separated by 13 mutational steps, one comprising the samples from Atlantic Plateau and the other the samples from Peripheral Depression. The microsatellite data corroborated the existence of the same two groups. The estimated molecular variability was similar for all populations. A bayesian phylogenetic tree was build and the estimation of age nodes used a strict molecular clock with mutation rate of 2,3%. All nodes dated in the Pleistocene: the divergence between the two groups was around 0,788 My; the radiation of populations from Peripheral Depression was later (~ 0,203 My) than the populations from Atlantic Plateau (~0,288 My), but the confidence intervals of these estimates overlap. The divergence of the groups may have occurred during a severe forest retraction but other hypotheses, such as different routes for the colonization of each unit cannot be discarded. Our data corroborate other findings of strong effects of the Pleistocene climate changes on the diversity of Atlantic Forest species.

Iker Irisarri
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales
Department of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology
Spain
Mitogenomics and the phylogeny of frogs
poster D21SY30PS1021

Author(s): Irisarri, I, Zardoya, R

Summary: 

Anurans have a long evolutionary history of more than 200 million years, having undergone an extraordinary diversification that gave rise to more than 6,000 extant species. Previous morphological and molecular studies greatly contributed to the knowledge of the anuran Tree of Life. Yet, important questions remain still under debate. A data set of complete mitochondrial genomes and nine nuclear loci was used to address key questions regarding the higher-level relationships in frogs: (i) the placement of the root in the frog Tree of Life, (ii) the branching order among the five major lineages, (iii) the phylogenetic position of basal relict families within modern frogs (Neobatrachia), and (iv) the internal phylogeny of the family Pipidae (Xenopus’ relatives). Our data set demonstrated good phylogenetic performance in resolving the proposed questions, and further allowed examining other issues of great interest, including (vi) the evolution of mitochondrial gene orders in Anura, (vii) the presence of accelerated molecular evolutionary rates associated with the origin of Neobatrachia, and (viii) the evolution of sound production mechanisms in tongueless frogs (family Pipidae), which incorporated new bioacoustic and morphological data.

Sive Finlay
School of Natural Sciences, Trinity College Dublin
Department of Zoology
Ireland
Morphological convergence and disparity in Malagasy tenrecs (Afrosoricida, Tenrecidae)
poster D21SY30PS0141

Author(s): Finlay, S, Cooper, N

Summary: 

Understanding patterns of variation in morphological diversity remains a central challenge in evolutionary biology. Two aspects of morphological variation which attract particular interest are convergence - the independent evolution of similar morphologies in phylogenetically distant species- and disparity –the range or significance of morphology in a given sample of organisms. Tenrecs appear to be both disparate from each other and convergent with other species such as hedgehogs, shrews, moles and otters. It has been suggested that these morphological patterns may arise as a function of ecological similarities and differences among the species. However, previous studies have neither quantified the degree of convergence or disparity present in tenrecs nor attempted to identify reasons for the occurrence of these patterns. These omissions represent significant gaps in our understanding of the evolution of morphological diversity. Theoretical models indicate that some degree of convergence is expected in most phylogenies. Quantitative analysis is therefore crucial if we are to identify significantly unusual and interesting patterns of convergence.
We collected morphological data from skulls and limbs of both tenrecs and the mammals they convergently resemble. Using a combination of both traditional and geometric morphometric techniques, we assess the evidence for significant morphological disparity among tenrecs and significant convergences among tenrecs and other mammal species. We also compare species’ ecological niches using novel techniques and determine the significance of ecological similarity in contributing to observed patterns of morphological convergence. The methods developed in this work – quantification of previously subjective morphological patterns and assessment of correlations between ecological and phenotypic similarities – have useful applications in diverse research areas including functional diversity biodiversity monitoring and conservation.

Baosheng Wang
Umeå University
Department of Ecology and Environmental Science
Sweden
MtDNA evolution and biogeography of the genus Pinus
poster D21SY30PS0814

Author(s): Wang, B, Wang, X

Summary: 

Reticulate evolution resulting from interspecific hybridization played a major role in the evolution of plant species. In the genus Pinus, mitochondrial (mt) genome is maternally inherited and chloroplast (cp) genome paternally inherited, which provides a unique opportunity to validate ambiguous instances of reticular evolution in this genus. In this study, we sequenced more than 10 kbp mt segments in 31 pine species to characterize the patterns of mtDNA evolution in and infer phylogeographical history of the genus. We found complex patterns of repetitive sequences scattered over the different regions of mt genome, and chimeric structures likely generated by complex recombination events. There were discordance between mtDNA and the previously published cpDNA phylogeny of Pinus, which are hypothesized to have been caused by at least four mtDNA capture events during range expansions of the pine species. These results indicates that both vertical and horizontal inheritance have been involved in the evolution of mtDNA in the genus Pinus. By using an 85 MY calibration as the divergence time of the two subgenera Pinus and Strobus, most of the current lineages were diverged within 20 MYA in both subgenera. However, the isolation history during Eocene and the processes of colonization during Oligocene-Miocene were different between the two subgenera. Subgenus Pinus was preserved in a single Eocene refugium located in a circumpolar high-latitude zone, and subsequently differentiated during Oligocene-Miocene expansion. In contrast, the genetic divergence of subgenus Strobus was initiated and reinforced during Eocene. The current distribution pattern of this subgenus was generated by Oligocene-Miocene expansion from three Eocene refugia via both within- and inter-continental dispersals. Our results revealed instances of ancient reticulate evolution in the genus Pinus, and shed light on the Eocene impacts on pine distribution and evolution.

Simone Delgado
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle - EPHE
Department of Systematics and Evolution
France
Multi-loci Bayesian inference of the Anguilla sp. genus radiation and comparative population genetics of the main lineages
talk D23SY30RT16:33R8

Author(s): Delgado, SF, Gilabert, A, Wirth, T

Summary: 

Anguilla sp. dispersal and putative spawning areas have divided the scientific community for decades. The rise of the Atlantic species is an unsolved question for which the most supported hypotheses are incompatible: either A. anguilla and A. rostrata came through the Tethys Corridor (closed ~30Mya) or through the Panama Isthmus (open until ~3 Mya). Our study focuses on reconstructing the evolutionary history of freshwater eels. The goal is to ascertain the global demographic dynamics through time for species from the major oceanic basins. Our analyses include TMRCA and diversity calculations, neutrality tests and molecular clock calibration. Using Sanger technology, we sequenced 5 mitochondrial markers, for a total of 304 fish from 10 species. With Bayesian coalescent inference, we estimated genealogies, branch lengths, substitution model parameters and population parameters through time. To infer the timing of demographic events and attach a real-time scale, we used prior information available in the literature. The estimated mutation rate (1.82E-9/bp.yr) and nodes ages were similar to widely accepted reports based on much smaller data sets. However, our results clearly favor the Panama Isthmus route hypothesis over the most popular Tethys route scenario for the settling of the Atlantic eels. Although most species are outside safe ecological limits, we detect genetic signatures of expansion in nearly all sampled populations (10 to 100 fold increases of Ne). These expansions (~400 000 to 720 000 ya) succeeded the mid-Pleistocene transition, a major change in glacial-interglacial cycles. Post-MPT warmth yielded a re-organization of the ocean circulation at intermediate depth and the egress of low-frequency variability in Paci?c surface temperatures, impelling a demographic rise. The reported severe decline calls for a better hold of the impact of climate and anthropogenic factors on the resilience potential of these fascinating catadromous fish.

Roger Vila
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC-UPF)
Animal Biodiversity and Evolution
Spain
Mutual exclusion between cryptic species generates most beta-diversity in West Mediterranean butterflies
poster D21SY30PS1100

Author(s): Vila, R, Voda, R, Dapporto, L, Dinca, V

Summary: 

The cryptic fraction of biodiversity is composed by morphologically similar species that are or have been overlooked by scientists. Most research is now directed towards documenting such cases, and estimating what will be the impact of this hidden fraction on the monumental task of describing Earth’s biodiversity. However, both cryptic and non-cryptic fractions are generally assumed otherwise similar, and whether they may display different properties is a question that has not been specifically addressed. We use the butterfly fauna of the West Mediterranean to compare biogeographical patterns of the two fractions. We demonstrate that the cryptic fraction of diversity is overwhelmingly composed by groups of species that are not sympatric on mainland and do not co-occur on any island, and we specifically test for environmental and biogeographic hypotheses as the causes of such chequered distribution patterns. By analyzing the phylogeography and ecological preferences of two cryptic species pairs we show that neither dispersal capacity, nor climatic factors seem to explain the observed distributions, and that the existence of species interactions resulting in mutual exclusion is the most likely hypothesis. Finally, we demonstrate that mutual exclusion between cryptic species on islands accounts for most beta-diversity turnover in such areas. Thus, we show that the inclusion of cryptic diversity, frequently excluded in large-scale surveys and studies because of intrinsic identification difficulties, is of capital importance. The conclusion that the cryptic fraction of biodiversity displays unique and relevant qualitative features opens the door to study further potential particularities, as well as to assess their implications in multiple research fields.

Iva Popovic
Simon Fraser University
Department of Biological Sciences
Canada
Not bothered by your sperm: positive selection in a gamete recognition gene is not driven by reinforcement in two congeneric sea stars
poster D21SY30PS0656

Author(s): Popovic, I, Hart, MW

Summary: 

The relative strength of sexual selection and sexual conflict can have important implications for the diversification of gamete recognition proteins and reproductive divergence among populations. However, the selective processes that operate within species are often difficult to discriminate from selection that operates among species, such as reinforcement. Here, we examine patterns of molecular evolution in the male-expressed gamete compatibility gene, bindin, in two broadcast spawning species of sea stars across their partially overlapping geographic range in the eastern Pacific. We use phylogeographic differences and variation in life history characteristics between Pisaster ochraceus and Pisaster brevispinus, to test among selective processes that may be important for bindin evolution in this genus. For both species, we find extensive allele sharing at the bindin locus among populations and weak population divergence, comparable to population genetic differentiation measured at the mitochondrial locus, COI. Phylogeny-based tests for positive selection indicate high rates of amino acid substitutions in bindin within each species, notably among those lineages leading to relatively rare and private alleles. However, this strong selection has not caused population-specific adaptation; similar levels of positive selection are found in geographic regions where P. ochraceus populations are sympatric and allopatric with P. brevispinus. Our results suggest that reinforcement is not an important source of selection for this species pair. The patterns are more consistent with negative frequency dependence and selection for rare bindin alleles, suggesting that sexual conflict may be a common evolutionary process underlying diversification and divergence among Pisaster species.

Nick Levsen
Newcastle University
School of Biology
United Kingdom
Nucleotide variation in the Plantago mitochondrial genome
poster D21SY30PS0771

Author(s): Levsen, ND, Wolff, K

Summary: 

Plantago is a model genus of plant mating system evolution. In addition to great variation in selfing and outcrossing syndromes, many species also exhibit gynodioecy: the presence of hermaphroditic and female individuals in the population. The complex interplay between cytoplasmic sterility factors and nuclear restorer genes that composes the genetic underpinnings of gynodioecy in Plantago may contribute to the marked, relative increase in mitochondrial nuclear substitution rate that has been observed. We sequenced 20 mitochondrial genes from multiple gynodioecious and monecious species to determine basic patterns of nucleotide variation within the genus as well as to test the hypothesis that gynodioecy contributes to increased substitution rates in the mitochondrial genome.

Catarina Dourado
Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon
Department of Animal Biology
Portugal
On the origin of the endemic pigeon Columba palumbus azorica
poster D21SY30PS0988

Author(s): Dourado, CG, Silva, I, Paulo, OS, Dias, D

Summary: 

Recent studies have been focusing on the phylogenetic relationships among the endemic Columba from the Macaronesia – C. palumbus azorica (Azores Islands), C. trocaz (Madeira Island), C. bollii and C. junoniae (both from Canary Islands) – through several approaches, namely mtDNA and microsatellites, with somewhat incongruent results. In the present study, the origin of the endemic subspecies C. p. azorica was inferred based on five nuclear fragments. Overall, C. p. azorica shows higher haplotype diversity and nucleotide diversity values than the mainland subspecies C. p. palumbus and the Madeiran C. trocaz for the most introns analysed, which was not expected since the insular populations frequently have less genetic diversity than the mainland populations. Our results also support a previous study in which it is described that C. trocaz is phylogenetically closer to C. bollii than to C. p. palumbus (Dourado et al., in press). Surprisingly, for the Azorean subspecies, while some samples cluster with the mainland C. p. palumbus, others share the same group with C. trocaz. The most plausible hypothesis to explain these results is a colonisation of the Azores by an ancestral of C. trocaz and C. bollii, that then diverged due to geographic isolation. More recently, the mainland subspecies C. p. palumbus reached those islands, conducing to admixture between both groups. Hybridization may have conducted to introgression of mtDNA from C. p. palumbus into the other individuals that inhabited Azores Islands, and mtDNA from C. p. palumbus prevailed. Therefore, instead of a simple isolated woodpigeon population, C. p. azorica is a much more complex and interesting event in pigeon evolution than formerly alleged.

Patrícia Brás
Faculdade de Ciências Universidade de Lisboa
Centro de Biologia Ambiental
Portugal
Patterns of genetic differentiation in a widespread predator insect species associated with greenhouse crops, Coenosia attenuata (Diptera: Muscidae)
poster D21SY30PS0958

Author(s): Brás, PG, Martins, R, Martins, J, Rebelo, MT, Franco, JC, Mateus, C, Paulo, OS, Figueiredo, E, Seabra, SG

Summary: 

Adults of the tiger-fly, Coenosia attenuata Stein, are the only known predators of adult stages of important greenhouse crop pests such as whiteflies and leafminers. C. attenuata has been recognized as a potential biological control agent in greenhouses but no studies to date have been done to characterize the genetic variation and differentiation across the distribution range of the species. The phylogeographic study on samples from Europe, North and South America and Western Asia based on cytochrome oxidase I mitochondrial gene reveals generally high haplotype diversity but low nucleotide diversity, suggesting a recent expansion, and shows evidences of a recent colonization of North and South America from the Palearctic. The probable origin of the species within the Paleotropical region are discussed, as well as the dispersal patterns of the species and the dates of divergence of populations.

Pamela Morales
Facultad de Ciencias de la Universidad de Chile
Departamento de Ciencias Ecológicas
Chile
Phylogenetic and morphometric analysis of the species of Orestias (Teleostei; Cyprinodontidae) of the southern Chilean Altiplano support the hypothesis of a recent origin of the species of the Lauca National Park modulated by the collapse of the Parinacota volcano
poster D21SY30PS0076

Author(s): Morales, PM, Cruz, F, Vila, I, Guerrero, CJ, Poulin, EA, Esquer, Y, Gaubert, P, Hugueny, B, Mendez, MA

Summary: 

The genus Orestias is composed of 44 species distributed along the Altiplano of South America. Seven species have been described for Chile, four of which inhabit Lauca National Park (LNP).

We sampled all species in Chile, and also new populations of Orestias within LNP. We constructed a molecular phylogeny using three mitochondrial markers (ND2, Cyt b and the control region). Additionally we performed a geometrical morphometric analysis of body form.

The phylogenetic reconstruction showed one lineage (species) for each locality. The exception to this pattern was found in the species described in the LNP, for which a polytomy was recovered. Additionally, a new lineage was found within LNP, composed of localities not previously analyzed.

In the morphometric analysis, individuals from Salt pan habitat were differentiated from those from rivers, lakes and wetlands. A second analysis focusing on localities showed that O. ascotanensis and O. gloriae (both of Salt pan habitat) are different among them, and also different from all individuals of LNP. These analyses showed that in the LNP there is little differentiation among the individuals from different localities, and that differences are no attributable to the different environments they inhabit.

Based on these results, we infer that the differentiation process of Orestias in the Chilean Altiplano has been mainly allopatric. Additionally, the high morphological and phylogenetic similarity found in the species described in LNP suggests a recent differentiation. This is concordant with geological information, which indicates that the formation in the LNP occurred about 12 kya due to the collapse of the Parinacota volcano.

Acknowledgements: FONDECYT 1110243, ECOS-CONICYT C10802, P05-002 ICM.

Nicolas Chazot
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle
France
Phylogenetic patterns of diversification and community structure reveal the role of ecological factors in generating and shaping Neotropical mimetic butterfly diversity
talk D21SY30RT15:45R2

Author(s): Chazot, N, Willmott, KR, Jiggins, CD, Freitas, AVL, Elias, M

Summary: 

The Neotropic is the most diverse region in the world. Identifying the causes underlying the observed diversity and spatial structure and unraveling how different factors interact remain outstanding questions. Addressing these questions in the Neotropics provides a unique opportunity to understand the processes that shape the structure of ecosystems. Recent advances in molecular phylogenetics, such as novel tests for diversification scenarios or community ecology phylogenetics, provide new insights into biodiversity questions. The Ithomiini tribe is a species-rich group of Neotropical butterflies, which consists of ca. 380 species widely distributed from the lowlands to 3000 m in the Andes. All species are involved in Müllerian mimicry, whereby different species protected by chemical defenses converge to share the same warning color patterns (mutualistic interactions). Here we combine phylogenetic, trait and species assemblage (community) data to investigate the effects of color patterns and adaptation to altitude in generating and shaping the diversity of Ithomiini.Comprehensive phylogenetic and trait analyses of several genera show that shifts in altitude and color patterns are both involved in diversification. In parallel, phylogenetic analyses of 15 communities along an altitudinal gradient show that both adaptation to altitude and mimetic interactions act as ecological filters and contribute in shaping species assemblages. Moreover, we find that both factors are not independent, and species that share color patterns also share altitudinal niche more often than predicted by phylogeny alone. The two approaches undertaken here are complementary and provide support for a similar scenario, whereby ecological factors, especially positive interactions, have been instrumental in generating and shaping biodiversity. Taking other types of positive interactions into consideration may shed light on why some groups have diversified dramatically, and why others have not.

Mariana Novello
Escola Superior de Agricultura "Luiz de Queiroz"
Genetics
Brazil
Phylogenetics and species delimitation in the orchid genus Brasiliorchis
poster D21SY30PS0593

Author(s): Novello, M, Veasey, EA, Koehler, S

Summary: 

Species are fundamental units of biodiversity. In recently or rapidly divergent clades species limits are often blurred and comprise fascinating opportunities for speciation studies. The absence of clear species boundaries also hampers the development of studies in others areas in biology and is an obstacle to conservation. The orchid genus Brasiliorchis currently contains 14 species mainly from the Brazilian Atlantic Forest Biome. Most morphological diagnostic characters among species are continuous and thus not useful for species identification. Our goals were to contribute to the identification of evolutionary distinct lineages within genus and assess if phylogenetic patterns of diversification agree with a previous morphometric study available. We used sequence data from plastid (psbj-petA, atpl-atpH) and nuclear (ITS1-2) regions considering wide morphological and geographical sampling variation. We sampled 96 individuals, 38 populations and 11 currently recognized species. Parsimony and bayesian analyses were performed considering data separately and concatenated. Two species, B. schunkeana and B. barbozae, were recovered as monophyletic, in agreement with morphological diagnostic characters. The concatenated analysis also suggested B. gracilis to comprise a distinct lineage, corroborating morphometric data. B. kautskyi and B. consanguinea, which are morphologically clearly distinct, are embedded in a poorly resolved clade including the remaining species (B. chrysantha, B. marginata, B. phoenicanthera, B. picta, B. porphyrostele, B. ubatubana), which are not supported by our results. Additional markers and species tree analyses are in progress to clarify diversification patterns in this group.

Soraia Martins
Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon-CBA / MNHNC-JB
Department of Vegetable Biology
Portugal
Phylogeny and evolution of the Pleurocarpous moss genus Andoa (Hypnaceae)
talk D23SY30RT16:57R8

Author(s): Martins, S, Sim-Sim, M, Stech, M

Summary: 

Andoa is a genus of Hypnaceae, one of the most complex pleurocarpous moss families that is resolved as highly polyphyletic in molecular phylogenetic reconstructions. The extant distribution of the single Andoa species, A. berthelotiana, in the archipelagos of Azores, Madeira and Canaries classifies it as a Macaronesian endemic. However, fossil records from Continental Europe revealed a larger distribution area in the past. Probably Andoa disappeared from Continental Europe during the late Tertiary glaciations and sought for refuge in Macaronesia, where it survived until today. Biogeographic affinities of Hypnaceae in Macaronesia as well as the phylogenetic position and relationships of Andoa are still little known. Recent phylogenetic analyses based on chloroplast, nuclear and mitochondrial DNA regions as well as AFLP fingerprinting revealed two geographically separated subgroups within Andoa berthelotiana, one comprising plants from Madeira and Canary Islands and the other plants from the Azores. The results also suggest a colonization pattern from the Azores to Madeira and the Canary Islands. Moreover, the closest relatives of Andoa, as indicated by the molecular data, were considered to belong to different pleurocarpous families. Other questions remain to be addressed, such as whether the two subgroups relate to ‘cryptic speciation’ or are also morphologically differentiated.

Silvia Perea
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales
Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva
Spain
Phylogeny and phylogeography of the freshwater fish genus Squalius (Teleostei, Cyprinidae) in Balkan region
poster D21SY30PS1048

Author(s): Perea, S, Zupancic, P, Doadrio, I

Summary: 

The Balkan region is one of the most interesting areas of the Mediterranean slope due to it shares ichthyofauna from two different and isolated regions: independent small/medium size rivers with a Mediterranean fluvial regime, and probably a shared paleogeographic history, and the Danube basin. One of the genera inhabiting this region is Squalius, which is widely distributed in Eurasia. Some studies have deal with the phylogenetic relationships of this genus at interspecific level in Balkan Peninsula; however, to date not hard efforts have been done to explore their intraspecific relationships and phylogeography. Besides, new species has been described in the last few years, which phylogenetic position is not known yet. In this study, we investigate the phylogeny and phylogeography of the species of the genus Squalius occurring in Balkan region. Thereby, we analyze mitochondrial and nuclear genes to infer the species tree and the phylogeographical structure of Balkan Squalius species, the estimated time of their main cladogenetic events and the historical processes that shaped the evolutionary history of this genus in the Balkan region.

Anatoly Krupitsky
A.N. Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution, Russian Academy of Sciences
Russia
Phylogeny of Palaearctic Callophrys (Lepidoptera, Lycaenidae) based on molecular data, morphology and biology
poster D21SY30PS0553

Author(s): Krupitsky, AV

Summary: 

Palaearctic ?allophrys (Lepidoptera, Lycaenidae) is taxonomically complicated genus. External similarity, some aspects of biology and localization in out-of-the-way regions which are the pecularities of the most species had obstructed investigation of this group. Complex analysis of COI-gene, morphology and some data on biology illuminates problems in systematics and lets to investigate phylogeny and main evolution trends of the group. Morphological analysis shown that the Palaearctic region is inhabited by 15 species of Callophrys, 3 of them were described as new by us. The center of biodiversity of the group is situated in Armenian Highland and Iranian Plateau. Morphological analysis let divide the genus into five main groups: C. avis, C. rubi, C. paulae, C. suaveola and C. mystaphia – species groups. Members of these groups have unique combination of external morphological characters and characters of genital structures. This division also correlates with host plant preferendum of each group. Molecular analysis based on COI-gene supports such division but usage of this gene as a barcode marker is impossible due to absence of gap between intra- and interspecific genetic differences in C. rubi – group. Probably it’s a consequence of relatively late divergention of the group. Phylogenetic scheme lets us suppose that ?. avis – group (which includes one species, morphologically close to Nearctic Callophrys) is the basal, and ?. suaveola – group is the most advanced. Thus we can define apomorphies and plesiomorphies in morphological characters and in modes of ecological strategies which are as follows: developed lateral lobes of antrum in female genitalia, developed anal lobe of hindwing, developed postdiscal row of spots and usage of Fabaceae as host plants (plesiomorphies); reduced lateral lobes of antrum, rounded hindwing, reduced postdiscal row of spots and usage of Umbelliferae and some Polygonaceae (Rheum spp.) as host plants (apomorphies).

Alastair Potts
Faculty of Science of the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University
Department of Botany
South Africa
Phylogeny reconstruction in the presence of intra-individual site polymorphisms: getting your support back
poster D21SY30PS1080

Author(s): Potts, AJ, Hedderson, TA, Grimm, GW

Summary: 

Intra-individual site polymorphisms (2ISPs, e.g. Y or R) in DNA sequences can arise from sequencing errors, or the presence of numerous variants within a multi-copy gene region such as the internal transcribed spacers (ITS) from the nuclear-encoded 35S rDNA cistron. If 2ISPs are due to the latter, and arose from a lack of concerted evolution (and not hybridisation), these sites still offer phylogenetic information. At present, the majority of tree inference algorithms either remove 2ISPs or treat them as ambiguities. This reduces the information content of the dataset and/or creates site uncertainty which in turn can reduce support. Here we propose 2ISP-informative implementations for distance-based, maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood algorithms. These implementations are compared against the standard methods (with 2ISP-ambiguous treatments) using simulated datasets, a meta-analysis from over 20 published datasets, and two case studies. We show that the 2ISP-informative approach offers improved phylogenetic resolution and support as the 2ISP content increases in the dataset. Importantly, hybrid samples with 2ISPs do not result in falsely inflated branch supports under the informative approach. We envisage that this informative approach will greatly aid phylogenetic inference using any nuclear DNA regions that contain 2ISPs (including consensus sequences generated from next generation sequencing), especially at the intra-generic or intra-specific level.

Federico Giri
Instituto Nacional de Limnología (INALI-CONICET-UNL)
Laboratorio de Macrocrustáceos
Argentina
Phylogeographic analysis of species of the freshwater pseudocrabs of the Family Aeglidae of southern South America
poster D21SY30PS1265

Author(s): Giri, F, Cabrera, JM, Rueda, EC, Loretan, G, Collins, PA

Summary: 

Aeglidae family is the only anomuran that live in freshwater environments of southern South America. The taxon is composed near 70 species and is not taxonomically resolved. The high endemism and diverse habitat colonized make that the Aeglidae species very particular taxa to study evolution. We analyzed mtDNA, COI-5P sequences (iBol Project) of seven species (Aegla scamosa, A. affinis, A. neuquensis, A. riolimayana, A. singularis, A. platensis, and A. uruguayana) that present inconsistencies in their morphological taxonomic characters. A Maximum Likelihood (ML) tree was performed by the software PHYLIP (v.3.69) and the consensus tree (by majority rule extended) was obtained Four species appear as monophyletic. However, A. neuquensis, A. singularis, and A. platensis show inconsistencies also observed in morphological studies. Most of the relationships among populations of each species were mainly correlated to their geographic distribution, and were not easily explained. Some populations were in doubt because their morphology and distribution could be considered new species or populations in process of speciation. La Blanca Lagoon specimens (A. affinis), a site isolated from the other hydrological habitats, appears as an out-group of the other A. affinis populations. Specimens of A. neuquensis have intermediate characters with A. riolimayana, and come out as an out-group of sympatric specimens of Epulaquen Lagoons. Specimens of A. singularis from Uruguay River were clustered with specimens of A. platensis rather than populations of the same species but separated by a geographic barrier. A. uruguayana cluster, previously hypothesized as an ancestral population, come into view as the most recently. The biogeopgraphic patterns were similar as we had observed by geometric morphometrics analysis. These results shows Aeglids as an excellent model for study evolution due to the family particularities and the geo-climatic events occurs in the South America.

Diushi Corona-Santiago
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales
Biodiversidad y Biología Evolutiva
Spain
Phylogeographic analysis of the Mexican freshwater fish complex Catostomus nebuliferus-plebeius
poster D21SY30PS1452

Author(s): Corona-Santiago, D, Tovar, L, Pérez-Rodríguez, R, Domínguez-Domínguez, O, Doadrio, I

Summary: 

The complex Catostomus nebuliferus-plebeius is endemic group of fish Northwestern Mexico (C. nebuliferus y C. plebeius), member of the Catostomidae family distributed in North America. The complex is distributed in basins of Sierra Madre Occidental: Catostomus nebuliferus in the Nazas river; while C. plebeius is distributed in the Mezquital, Piaxtla, Fuerte, Yaqui, Conchos and internal basins derived from the Guzmán lagoon. Therefore the origin and activity of this mountain system should be associated to the evolutionary history of the complex. The first plausible scenario is where this mountain serves as a center of diversification. The second scenario would be that the current distribution of complex is resulted of admixture between populations isolated in the lowlands to the west and east of the mountain during the Pleistocene interglacials states. We implemented phylogeographic, phylogenetic and population genetics analysis to describe the evolutionary history of complex. High genetics distances were found in preliminary results between all populations of the complex (3-5% with Cytochrome b mitochondrial gene) and high genetic diversity in each population, indicative of an ancient isolation. A process of isolation occurred ~5.7 millions years ago in the Pliocene, isolating the population of Nazas and Mezquital of the North basins, resulted of the geological events of the region; while in the same period (~4.5 millions years ago) were separated populations from Mezquital river and C. nebuliferus populations. The populations of C. plebeius of the north basins were isolated gradually during the last 4 millions years describing a South-North isolation pattern associated to a geological activity. Null migration rate was estimated between populations after isolation discarding of river piracy in the Pleistocene. Our results have taxonomic and conservation implications, because the complex currently consists of several independent evolutionary lineages.

Graciela Sotelo
CIBIO - Centro de Investigação em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos
Portugal
Phylogeographic history of the flat periwinkles, Littorina fabalis and L. obtusata
poster D21SY30PS0999

Author(s): Sotelo, G, Costa, D, Duvetorp, M, Panova, M, Johannesson, K, Faria, R, Faria, R

Summary: 

The flat periwinkle Littorina fabalis is an intertidal gastropod distributed in the NE Atlantic from Iceland and the White Sea in the North to Portugal in the South. It exhibits several ecotypes along its range and it represents a promising system to explore the mechanisms of ecological divergence as well as of parallel evolution. Nonetheless, prior knowledge of the phylogeographic history of the species is required to address these questions. Previous studies suggest a complex diversification process among Northern European L. fabalis ecotypes, further complicated by the interaction with its sister species L. obtusata. Both species co-occur in most European shores and, while they are well differentiated in terms of ecology, morphology, allozymes and microsatellites, they share substantial mitochondrial variation. With the ultimate goal of understanding to what extent the observed intra and interspecific patterns could result from single or multiple events of adaptation, we perform a comprehensive phylogeographic assessment of L. fabalis and L. obtusata. We cover the whole distribution range, including all L. fabalis ecotypes described so far, and use both mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data to shed light on the demographic history of the flat periwinkles, setting an important baseline to study the above mentioned mechanisms of parallel evolution and ecological speciation.

Ana Rodrigues
Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon
Department of Animal Biology, CBA
Portugal
Phylogeographic structure of the spittlebug Philaenus spumarius (Hemiptera, Aphrophoridae) based on mitochondrial DNA and RAD sequencing
poster D21SY30PS1029

Author(s): Rodrigues, AS, Silva, SE, Marabuto, E, Silva, DN, Silva, J, Wilson, MR, Thompson, V, Yurtsever, S, Halkka, A, Gharbi, K, Blaxter, M, Borges, PAV, Quartau, JA, Jiggins, C, Paulo, OS, Seabra, SG

Summary: 

We investigated the evolutionary history of the meadow spittlebug Philaenus spumarius, a widespread and polyphagous insect species of the Holarctic region, limited in its range by the presence of enough humidity in the earlier life stages, and that has a remarkable dorsal colour/pattern polymorphism of the adults. The mitochondrial gene cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (COI) revealed three main haplogroups in Europe: the “western”, the “eastern-Mediterranean” and the “north-eastern” haplogroups, which overlapped in some regions. Evidence of recent divergence events at less than one million years ago in southern Mediterranean peninsulas followed by northward population expansions were found. Recent gene-flow events between the main southern peninsulas and between the Iberian Peninsula and North Africa were also detected. A probable British origin for the insular populations of the Azores and New Zealand was revealed, as well as multiple geographic origins for North American populations from western and northern Europe. Restriction site associated DNA (RAD) sequencing was also applied in a set of 8 populations from the different mitochondrial haplogroups and the differentiation patterns obtained from a set of over 15,000 SNPs were concordant with COI results and with a better resolved tree.

Alexandra Ley
University Halle-Wittenberg
Germany
Phylogeographic studies reveal diverse speciation patterns in central African tropical herbs (Marantaceae)
poster D21SY30PS0422

Author(s): Ley, AC, Hardy, OJ

Summary: 

Vegetation history in tropical Africa is still to date largely unknown. Hypotheses include major speciation events during Pleistocene climate changes and ecological speciation across abiotic gradients. Phylogeographic studies might shed new light on this matter as indicated by similar studies in temperate regions; the challenges in tropical Africa being different highly diverse biotic and abiotic conditions and a distinct climatic and geological history. Here we analysed phylogeographic patterns (chloroplast-DNA sequences, AFLP, microsatellites) of eight widespread herb and liana species from four different genera of the family Marantaceae (Zingiberales) including four pairs of sister species.

Across all investigated species, intraspecific patterns of genetic diversity from chloroplast DNA were concordant with overall Marantaceae diversity: higher in topographically rich Gabon and showing traces of expansion across the rather flat central Cameroon and the Congo basin. However, comparing sister species relationships between different genera revealed different levels and modes of speciation. Patterns in the genus Haumania suggest allopatric speciation with genetic pattern concordant with postulated Pleistocene refugia followed by current intraspecific gene flow in overlapping distribution areas. Concordant pattern of genetic diversity and the absence of hybridization in the genus Megaphrynium might hint towards sympatric speciation through adaptation to different pollinator species. In the genus Marantochloa allopatric speciation followed by complete incompatibility between sister species is indicated in one species pair. In a second case two morphologically distinct sister species are indistinguishable genetically and the mode of speciation still open to debate.

This study gives an insight into the diverse and ongoing evolutionary processes in central tropical Africa and the role of different geographic areas and ecological traits in the evolutionary process.

Luiz Filipe Bartoleti
University of Campinas
Deparment of Genetics and Evolution
Brazil
Phylogeographical patterns of Nephila clavipes (Araneae: Nephilidae) in Neotropical Rainforests
poster D21SY30PS1052

Author(s): Bartoleti, LM, Solferini, VN

Summary: 

The two great Neotropical rainforests, Amazonian and Atlantic, are separated by a large corridor of drier vegetation, but share many taxa at family, genus and even species levels. There are evidences that the two forests had been connected in the past, and phylogeographical studies on species occurring in both biomes can help to elucidate the evolutionary history of these biomes. Nephila clavipes is a widely distributed Neotropical spider species found in these two rainforests and also in some drier areas between them. We sequenced a 491 bp COI mitochondrial region of 323 individuals from 15 sites along central and south regions of Atlantic Forest and 9 individuals from one site in south Amazonia. Our data show the presence of three major mitochondrial lineages, not entirely related to geographic distribution. The samples from Amazonia grouped with some central Atlantic populations on the haplotype network, despite the great geographic distance. Divergences among lineages were estimated on the Pleistocene, between 680 and 510 thousand years ago; data also suggest that the latest expansions events took place around 250 thousand years ago. The climatic fluctuations of Pleistocene may have played a role on the divergence and radiation of the lineages, as also found for vertebrate and plant species. Our study reinforces the role of Pleistocene climate changes in shaping the diversity in the Neotropics.

Neus Marí-Mena
Faculty of Sciences of the University of A Coruña
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology
Spain
Phylogeography and conservation of a protected moth
talk D23SY30RT18:09R8

Author(s): Marí-Mena, N, Lopez-Vaamonde, C, Naveira, H, Auger-Rozenberg, M, Vila, M

Summary: 

Phytophagous insects, one of the most diverse animal groups, and their host plants provide excellent model systems to assess the relative contribution of extrinsic environmental factors and intrinsic lineage-specific traits to diversification. We selected the Spanish Moon Moth Graellsia isabellae, an insect that feeds on three pine species, as a model organism to study how modifications in habitat availability influenced the survival of organisms. DNA variation in one mitochondrial and nine nuclear microsatellite markers revealed six clusters across the 28 studied populations in Spain and France. This strong phylogeographical pattern was most likely driven by oscillations in the host-plant distribution range, as four of the six clusters coincide with glacial refugia for Pinus sylvestris, the main host. Both the Central Iberian and French Alpine clusters show the lowest genetic diversity and they are probably the result of postglacial range expansions. We propose the Late Quaternary retraction of P. sylvestris in Southern Spain as the ecological driver for a host-shift to other congeneric species: P. nigra and P. halepensis. Lastly, we define six evolutionary significant units (four of them congruent with the subspecific taxonomy) intimately related to suitable habitat, the main factor shaping the identity of this phytophagous lepidopteran.

Andrew Helmstetter
Imperial College London
Department of Life Sciences
United Kingdom
Phylogeography and morphology of the South American Annual Killifish genus, Austrolebias
talk D21SY30RT18:57R2

Author(s): Helmstetter, AJ, Leroi, AM, Van Dooren, TJM, Savolainen, V

Summary: 

The genus Austrolebias consists of over 30 species of freshwater annual killifish. These fish reside in ephemeral pools across a wide region of South America including parts of Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, Argentina and Bolivia. Austrolebias possess a peculiar and interesting life-history. Males and females dive together into the muddy substrate of the pond and deposit their gametes. Later, these adults are often seen dying in shallow water as the ponds completely evaporate during the beginning of the dry season. The eggs then go through several stages of diapause until hatching is triggered by the earliest wet season rains, after which the fish grow rapidly and the process is repeated. The large geographic range of Austrolebias means that the genus is subject to considerable variation in climate. I reveal which climate variables are most important in determining the distribution of Austrolebias by using data collated from my own collection trips, primary literature, online biodiversity databases as well as the records of amateur collectors. Larger species of Austrolebias can be up to 13cm in length, the smallest only 4cm. Recent phylogenetic work has shown that large species have been derived from small species in at least 3 separate instances. I use phylogenetic independent contrasts to investigate whether any bioclimatic variables can explain this variation in size. In addition, species distribution models (SDMs) are built using Maxent and subsequently compared using ENMTools in order to identify whether those species that are morphologically similar possess a similar climatic niche. The nature of the Austrolebias life cycle suggests that it is sensitive to climate change. Current SDMs are compared to 2050 SDMs using the HadCM3 model with multiple emission scenarios to predict the future range shifts of Austrolebias in order to discern the effect climate change will have on this genus.

Sozos Michaelides
University of Oxford
Department of Zoology
United Kingdom
Phylogeography and population genetic structure of an alien lizard
poster D21SY30PS0759

Author(s): Michaelides, S, While, GM, Bell, C, Uller, T

Summary: 

Invasive species have been long studied for their ecological and economic impact on the native species. Recently their potential as study systems in evolutionary biology has been recognised since they present an opportunity to study ecological and evolutionary processes over contemporary timescales. The common European wall lizard, Podarcis muralis, covers a wide range in western and southern Europe with several genetically and geographically distinct populations. The species was introduced, through multiple introductions, in the UK where it has established more than 25 populations. Identifying the phylogeographic origin of introduced populations is an important first task and we have resolved this using a phylogenetic tree approach. We sequenced a 655bp region of the mtDNA cytB gene and combined unique haplotypes from 500 individuals from 23 non native populations with published sequences from the native range. Furthermore, we genotyped 960 individuals from both introduced and native populations at 16 microsatellite loci to infer their genetic diversity and how is affected by their origin and admixture. We identified 12 unique haplotypes in the introduced populations that were nested into five, geographically distinct, native clades. Multiple clade origin was common within populations, with a maximum of three different haplotype clades being represented within a single population. These results show that human introductions have created substantial opportunities for hybridization between genetically and phenotypically distinct lineages. Overall, the genetic diversity was significantly lower in the non-native populations but mixed-origin populations had higher genetic diversity than single origin populations. Changes in the genetic diversity may have important consequences for the establishment success and long-term viability of introduced wall lizard populations.

Fernanda Bered
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Genetics
Brazil
Phylogeography of Ortgiesia subgenus (Bromeliaceae) as a contribution to the effort in understanding the historical processes involved in the species diversification in Southern portion of the Brazilian Atlantic forest
poster D21SY30PS1001

Author(s): Bered, F, Zanella, CM, Buttow, MV, Capra, F, Silva, CP, Goetze, M

Summary: 

The number of phylogeographical studies of South America is lower than other regions, despite it having one of the highest levels of biodiversity on Earth. These studies are essential for a better understanding of all the biomes of South America as a whole. Here we studied a group of seven species from Ortgiesia subgenus (Bromeliaceae) which are endemic of the southern Brazilian Atlantic Forest (BAF). A relatively few phylogeographic studies were undertaken in this region so far that explain the high number of endemic species and high genetic diversity encountered. To understand the evolutionary history of this group and also of southern BAF, we analyzed the sequences of two plastidial intergenic spacers and one nuclear region from populations throughout the known distribution of all seven species. Thirty-five haplotypes were found for the plastid markers with three of them shared by some species. For the nuclear region, 10 haplotypes were observed and the most frequent one was shared by all the species. This sharing suggests the persistence of ancestral polymorphisms during speciation events and/or hybridization, since individuals with intermediate morphology can be found. In general, species with widespread geographical distribution showed the greatest genetic diversity levels (Aechmea caudata and A. kertesziae). The exception was A. comata that showed high genetic diversity despite it only occurs on an island. High genetic structure was observed for cpDNA; however for the nuclear region, no genetic structure occurs. These preliminary results indicate that some of the species could be affected by the Pleistocene climatic oscillations as already observed for other species of the BAF. More analysis are in progress to confirm this pattern and will be very important in understanding the complex and high levels of biodiversity in South America, and may provide valuable insights into the historical processes underlying diversification in this region.

Hajime Ikeda
Okayama University
Institute of Plant Science and Resources
Japan
Pleistocene speciation and biogeographic history of arctic-alpine plants
poster D21SY30PS0770

Author(s): Ikeda, H, Setoguchi, H

Summary: 

The climatic change in Pleistocene has drastically influenced on global biological diversity. Due to the beginning of cool climate, species adapted to cold environment obtained the chance to expand widespread range, especially in the boreal region in the northern hemisphere. Thereafter, repeated climatic oscillations caused geographic isolation and genetic differentiation throughout species’ range, leading to allopatric speciation. In contrast, repeated changes of species’ range following climatic oscillations may allow genetic admixture among diverging lineages and prevent speciation. Here, we examined evolutionary impact of Pleistocene climatic changes by focusing on arctic-alpine plants in genus Phyllodoce (Ericaceae). Molecular phylogenetic analyses based on multilocus sequences of nuclear genes revealed that a monophyly of four boreal species with basal divergence of an alpine endemic one in the Japanese archipelago. Model-base analyses elucidated that the divergence of four boreal species occurred with introgression, even if discarding an apparent signature of genetic mixture beyond species. By calculating divergence time based on general substitution rate, the divergence of four boreal species from Japanese endemic one as well as their diversification were originated in the late Pleistocene (ca. 60-80 yBP and ca. 30 yBP, respectively), during which the climatic oscillations started to be intensified. Consequently, our study demonstrated that diversification of arctic-alpine species certainly occurred following the Pleistocene climatic oscillations regardless of the potential genetic admixture, whereas a marginal endemic in Eastern Asia was a relict species of ancient divergence.

Miriam Casal
National Museum of Natural Sciences
Department of Biodiversity and Evolutionary Biology
Spain
Plio-Pleistocene effects on the phylogeny, phylogeography and historical evolution of freshwater fish species Luciobarbus sclateri (Teleostei, Cyprinidae) in the western Mediterranean region
poster D21SY30PS1049

Author(s): Casal, M, Sousa-Santos, C, Robalo, J, Almada, V, Doadrio, I

Summary: 

The Iberian Peninsula has been traditionally considered as glacial refugia, since glaciers were limited to mountain areas. The concept of refugia is linked to population reduction during cooler periods and expansion once the climate turns back to mild temperatures. In the case of continental icthyofauna, the postglacial spreading is strongly conditioned by the hydrogeographical configuration and could affect the phylogeographic structure throughout time, due not only to its low dispersal power but also to a reduced effective population size. Currently, these refugia are considered heterogeneous and refugia within refugia have been proposed. One of the species used as a model to assess this approach has been the barbel species Luciobarbus sclateri (Günther, 1868), which is an endemism of Iberian Peninsula southern rivers. Thereby, this study aims to know which effects have climatic changes during Plio-Pleitocene on Luciobarbus sclateri, as well as trying to explain, through genetic data, why this species is clearly dominant in those freshwater fish communities where it is distributed. Our hypothesis is that its particular biology and ecological tolerance have resulted to a high genetic variability and scarce population structure. So far, others studies only have dealt with mitochondrial gene, due to the problems related to tetraploidy. Therefore, we analyze mitochondrial and nuclear genes to infer the species tree and its phylogeographical structure, as well as estimate time of the historical processes leading to the evolutionary history of this Iberian endemism.

Mario Fernández-Mazuecos
Real Jardín Botánico, CSIC
Dpto. de Biodiversidad y Conservación
Spain
Pollinator-restrictive flower traits determine evolutionary optima with differential diversification rates in bifid toadflaxes (Linaria sect. Versicolores)
talk D22SY30RT11:18R9

Author(s): Fernández-Mazuecos, M, Blanco-Pastor, J, Gómez, J, Vargas, P

Summary: 

The role of flower specialization in plant speciation and evolution remains controversial. Here we analyzed the evolution of flower traits restricting the access to pollinators in the bifid toadflaxes (Linaria sect. Versicolores), a monophyletic group of c. 30 species and subspecies with highly specialized corollas. A time-calibrated phylogeny based on both nuclear and plastid DNA sequences was obtained using a coalescent-based method, and flower morphology was characterized by means of morphometric analyses. Using recently-developed methods, directional trends in morphological traits and trait-dependent diversification rates were jointly analyzed, and morphological shifts were reconstructed along the phylogeny. Our results indicated that a restrictive character state (narrow corolla tube) may be ancestral to Linaria sect. Versicolores. After its early loss in the most species-rich clade, this character state has been convergently reacquired in multiple lineages of this clade in recent times, yet it has exerted a negative influence on diversification rates. Comparative analyses and pollinator surveys suggest that the narrow- and broad-tubed flowers are evolutionary optima representing divergent strategies of pollen placement on nectar-feeding insects. We therefore suggest that opposing individual-level and species-level selection pressures may have driven the evolution of pollinator-restrictive traits in bifid toadflaxes.

Maria Slugina
Center “Bioengineering” RAS
Department of Genetic Engineering
Russia
Polymorphism in the Pain-1 Vacuolar Invertase gene in Solanum species
poster D21SY30PS1103

Author(s): Slugina, MA, Kochieva, EZ

Summary: 

Invertases play an important role in carbohydrate metabolism. Moreover, invertases are involved in plant development and affect the formation of plant response to abiotic stress. In this work polymorphism in vacuolar invertase gene Pain_1 was characterized. Overall, 35 sequences of 28 species of the Solanum genus were analyzed. They included 9 tomato species and 11 potato species (subgenus Potatoe), other samples represented subgenera Leptostemonum, Minon, Solanum and Brevantherum.
The length of analyzed Pain-I exons III-V fragments varied from 591 to 962 bp as a result of multiple indels in intron III, which varied from 150 bp in S. peruvianum and S. habrochaites to 519 bp in S. pseudocapsicum. In total 80 indels were identified. The biggest deletions (157 bp) characterized intron III of S. sisymbriifolium, S. mauritianum, S. pseudocapsicum ? Datura stramonium (taken as outgroups). Totally 188 SNPs were found. 49 SNPs were localized in coding regions. 39 of them resulted in 7 synonymous and 32 nonsynonymous aminoacid substitutions in the protein. Several substitutions and indels were specific to individual taxa or taxon groups, including potato and tomato species. Nine SNPs and eight allelic variants (SNP sets) have earlier been identified in exons III–V of S. tuberosum Pain-1. We examined the corresponding Pain_1 region in tuber-producing potato species (Solanum sect. Petota) and observed 6 new SNPs and 7 allelic variants. Two new allelic variants were found in the tomato species. In total, 18 new allelic variants were revealed in Solanaceae species examined. Obtained genetic distances and phylogenetic trees supported the commonly accepted taxonomic classification of the species, indicating that the Pain-1 fragment is suitable for taxonomic identification and phylogenetic studies in Solanaceae. This work was supported by RFBR grant 11-04-00446.

Heather Ritchie
University of Aberdeen
United Kingdom
Population genetic and phylogeographic structure of hadal amphipods
poster D21SY30PS0855

Author(s): Ritchie, H, Jamieson, AJ, Piertney, SB

Summary: 

The hadal zone comprises ocean depths below 6000m and represents the deepest 45% of the oceans. It consists of trenches that are formed along subduction zones and are characterised by unique topography, geographical isolation, sporadic food availability, low temperatures, high pressures and the absence of natural light. Hadal trenches are relatively unexplored and are thus one of the least understood habitats on the planet. From a biogeographical perspective, hadal trenches have been considered as isolated “islands” with little genetic exchange between trenches and high levels of species endemism. Such as assertion is difficult to reconcile, however, given some species appear to have a cosmopolitan distribution across the abyssal and hadal zones. Such contradictions highlight how little is known about hadal ecology in general and modes of dispersal, levels of gene flow and drivers of phylogeographic structure in particular. Here we examine patterns of genetic divergence between trench populations of two Lysianassoidea amphipod species (Hirondellea dubia and Paralicella tenuipes) which constitute a significant and ubiquitous component of the hadal fauna and are key members within hadal food webs. A suite of species-specific microsatellite markers were developed and used to examine levels of population genetic divergence among populations both within and between trenches around the Pacific Rim, where 75% of hadal trenches are found. This data is combined with mito-genome DNA sequence polymorphisms to resolve overall levels of phylogeographic and population genetic structure and using a landscape genomics approach to assess different hypothesized routes of gene flow and ancestral colonisation.

Marja Heikkinen
University of Oulu
Department of Biology
Finland
Prelude to the story of domestic goose in Europe
poster D21SY30PS1313

Author(s): Heikkinen, ME, Mundee, M, Pyhäjärvi, T, White, TA, Aspi, J, Searle, JB, Ruokonen, M

Summary: 

The development of next generation sequencing based techniques has increased the amount of data available for population genetic studies. NGS techniques have also become popular in the studies of domestication due to genome-wide information they can provide on the species of interest. Chicken has been the most popular object of study on avian domestication due to its worldwide distribution. We wanted to focus on a more unfamiliar yet important domestic bird species, that is, the European domestic goose. We used a genotyping by sequencing (GBS) approach to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms in domestic geese and its wild ancestor, the greylag (Anser anser). We consider the impacts of inbreeding, drift, bottlenecks and artificial selection in promoting differentiation between the wild and domestic birds. We discuss the potential of GBS to investigate other aspects of the story of domestication of the goose such as where and when it happened.

Melisa Olave
CENPAT-CONICET
Unidad de Sistemática, Biogeografía y Biología Evolutiva
Argentina
Problems with DNA-based species delimitation with a Bayesian statistical approach because of upstream errors involving individual assignments to putative species
poster D21SY30PS1219

Author(s): Olave, M, Solà, E, Knowles, L

Summary: 

Genetic-based delimitation of species typically involves a multistep process in which DNA data is analyzed with a sequence of different programs. Although the performance of the programs associated with each step have been evaluated separately, no analysis has considered how errors in the upstream assignment of individuals to putative species impacts the accuracy of delimited species in downstream analyses, such as those associated with the coalescent-based Bayesian statistical program bpp. Here we show that because of differences in the minimal data requirements for accurate performance in each of the different steps involved in the delimitation process, the reliability of inferences about species delimited from genetic data is compromised. Our results provide important insights into the practice of species delimitation by highlighting how uncertainty in the guide tree, as well as individual-species association (both derived from upstream analyses to bpp) can lead to under and overestimation of biodiversity, even though bpp itself may perform very well.

Sébastien Wielgoss
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (ETH) Zürich
Institute of Integrative Biology
Switzerland
Putting social microbes on the map: a phylogenomics approach
talk D23SY30RT17:45R8

Author(s): Wielgoss, S, Velicer, GJ

Summary: 

Careful analysis of natural genetic variation is crucial for understanding the processes driving the evolution of phenotypic traits in natural populations of microorganisms, including social traits. These processes include both those that generate new genetic variation (mutation, recombination, horizontal gene transfer) and those that determine the dynamics and ultimate fate of such variation (selection and drift). However, our understanding of natural microbial genetic diversity and how it relates to phenotypic divergence is extremely limited, including for social traits such as those exhibited by the myxobacteria. Based on multi-locus sequence types (MLST), several recent studies have started to characterize the population structure and spatial distribution of the genetic variance in natural isolates of a prominent member of this class of social delta-proteobacteria, Myxococcus xanthus. Here, we extend this work much further by applying a phylogenomics approach that aims at putting microbial genomes on a map spanning metric scales as disparate as 10^-9 m (fruiting bodies) up to 10^7 m (continents). Given the geographic information, we strive to disentangle and quantify the strength of the various evolutionary forces and how these shape the biogeography in this social model organism in the wild.

Katy Jones
Natural History Museum and University of Bristol
United Kingdom
Radiation patterns within the endemic genus Pericallis: a model taxon for contrasting patterns of diversity between Macaronesian oceanic archipelagos
poster D21SY30PS0548

Author(s): Jones, KE, Carine, M, Hiscock, S

Summary: 

Macaronesia is a biogeographical region comprising the volcanic, oceanic archipelagos of the Azores, Madeira, Canary Islands, Salvage Islands and the Cape Verdes, in the Atlantic Ocean. The region is a European Biodiversity hotspot, hosting a rich endemic flora, but there are marked disparities in levels and patterns of endemic diversity across the region. The ‘Azores Diversity Enigma’ refers to the paucity of single island endemics (SIEs) and in situ radiations in the Azores flora compared to all other oceanic archipelagos. The Macaronesian endemic Pericallis is a unique example of a flowering plant genus restricted to the Azores, Madeira and Canary Islands. It has diversified in the Canary Islands with 11 restricted SIEs whereas in the Azores just one species with two ecologically distinct subspecies are recognised. As such, the species diversity patterns closely reflect the disparities evident between the floras of the archipelagos more generally. I have carried out morphological and AFLP analyses, contrasting diversity patterns of Pericallis between the Azores and Canary Islands. This talk presents the results of these analyses and discusses how these results can help to explain the ‘Azores Diversity Enigma’.

Tanja Adnadevic
Institute for Biological Research "Siniša Stankovic", University of Belgrade
Department of Genetic Research
Serbia
Reconstructing the origin and spread of yellow-necked mouse Apodemus flavicollis (Rodentia, Muridae) in the Balkans
poster D21SY30PS0856

Author(s): Adnadevic, T, Jovanovic, VM, Bugarski-Stanojevic, V, Blagojevic, J, Vujoševic, M

Summary: 

The reconstruction of the glacial and postglacial history of species has been in a focus of many genetic researches. A comparative analysis of the levels and patterns of genetic variation across a range of Palaearctic animal taxa has revealed the existence of refugia in the Iberian, Italian and the Balkan peninsula. Numerous studies described the Serbia as a meeting point of different recolonization routes of A. flavicollis. The aim of this study is to assess the population divergence and effects of present and past microevolutionary processes on genetic differentiation of populations. Due to the existence of different natural barriers between populations, we expected to find different genetic lineages that survived last glaciations in independent local Balkan refugia. By using AFLPs, we found evidence for significant differences in genetic diversity and genetic differentiation between four populations that are relatively close in space, but separated by major barriers such as rivers. The analyzed populations formed three clusters, corresponding to the three genetic lineages that survived last glaciations in the Balkan refugia where they diverged separately. In silico data sets of genetic polymorphism under specified scenarios were generated by forwards-in-time and backwards-in-time simulators in order to describe the evolutionary history and genetic architecture of a species. The comparison of simulated data and real samples suggests that population divergence in A. flavicollis can be best explained through complicated migration scheme that includes spatial expansion followed by island model of population structure. The observed patterns are reviewed in terms of defining phylogeographic relationships among extant populations. In order to better understand the evolutionary history of the other species in Balkan refugia, divergence time estimates and the effects of geographic barriers to gene flow in general are going to be discussed

Silvia Marková
Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics AS CR, v.v.i.
Laboratory of Molecular Ecology
Czech Republic
Relaxed functional constraints on a triplicate alpha-globin gene in the bank vole
poster D21SY30PS1185

Author(s): Marková, S, Searle, J, Kotlík, P

Summary: 

Gene duplication plays an important role in the origin of evolutionary novelties, but the mechanisms responsible for the retention and subsequent divergence of newly created duplicates are not fully understood. The alpha-globin genes provide an example of gene family with different numbers of gene duplicates among rodents. While Rattus and Peromyscus each have three adult alpha-globin genes (HBA-T1, HBA-T2 and HBA-T3), Mus has only two copies. In Peromyscus, HBA-T3 appears transcriptionally inactive, despite the presence of an intact open reading frame and conserved splice junctions. We have cloned the alpha-globin genes from another cricetid rodent, the bank vole Clethrionomys glareolus, by RACE-PCR and assessed their relative expression by RNA-Seq. We show that the bank vole possesses three transcriptionally active alpha-globin genes with different expression levels. The HBA-T1 and HBA-T2 genes show 5-fold expression difference and are nearly identical in coding sequence. Although phylogenetically grouped with HBA-T1 and HBA-T2, HBA-T3 is distinguished by multiple amino-acid substitutions and is expressed 5- to 20-fold lower than HBA-T1 and HBA-T2. Alpha-globin polypetides corresponding to all three genes were detected by electrophoresis, suggesting that the bank vole HBA-T3 is a functional gene. Interestingly, we found two independent HBA-T3 alleles with a premature termination codon in exon 2 (PTC2) and exon 3 (PTC3), respectively. RT-PCR found evidence of transcription for the PTC3 allele, but not for the PTC2 allele. RNA-Seq reads uniquely aligning to the PTC2 allele suggest that its translation is reduced or prevented by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Due to the absence of a downstream exon-exon junction, the PTC3 allele does not elicit NMD and is predicted to yield a truncated protein. The segregation of non-functional alleles in the bank vole suggests relaxed purifying selection and/or recent origin of HBA-T3 in this species.

Ceferino Varón
Faculty of Life Sciences of the University of Manchester
United Kingdom
Reliability of estimating phylogenies using multidimensional quantitative characters
poster D21SY30PS1199

Author(s): Varón, C, Whelan, S, Klingenberg, C

Summary: 

Quantitative multidimensional traits, such as shape, have been used in phylogeography and phylogenetics in recent years. However, there is no consensus about the reliability of the phylogenies built using these traits. Empirical studies have yielded different results in this regard, but no study has systematically studied it. Here, we simulate the evolution of four taxa under a Brownian motion model in a multidimensional space with varying dimensionality and different sets of branch lengths. In addition, two more sets of simulations with different degrees of integration among variables are tested using modified Brownian motion models. The percentage of correct phylogenetic reconstructions is used as a measure of phylogenetic accuracy. The results suggest that with low dimensionality, the phylogenetic accuracy is poor and problems of long-branch attraction appear. When few variables are used to describe the taxa, the reliability is poor and convergence appears even when two far-related groups of taxa are used, if one taxon within each group has evolved much. The accuracy is better when many variables are used. However, a high number of variables does not prevent from convergence when the variables used have the same pattern of dependency. Integration among variables has a strong negative effect. Reducing its effect implies knowing the pattern of interdependence among variables during the evolutionary process, which is difficult or impossible and requires large sample sizes. There are just very few favourable and restricted situations in which quantitative multidimensional data can be used to build phylogenies with accurate results. The effect of integration, really widespread, makes this technique not to be advisable.

Jostein Gohli
University of Oslo
Natural History Museum
Norway
Resolving species trees and rewriting taxonomy: Using next-gen sequencing data to unravel a recent radiation of a passerine bird on an island system
poster D21SY30PS1192

Author(s): Gohli, J, Johnsen, A, Popp, M, Leder, E, Lifjeld, J

Summary: 

Resolving species trees for island populations is challenging due to high complexity of demographic factors. We have analysed RAD tag SNPs from African Blue Tit (Cyanistes teneriffae) populations on the Canary Islands and from the mainland Blue Tit (Cyanistes caeruleus), applying only tools that do not rely on concatenation of loci. Our data provide resolution where earlier reports have been unsuccessful, and strongly indicate that the population on La Palma (C. t. palmensis) represent a recent colonization from mainland Europe while the other Canary Islands were colonized from Morocco, which seems to be the oldest population in our system. Sperm collected from these birds was used to test the hypothesis that divergence in sperm length mirrors genetic divergence, which held true against both SNPs and the mitochondrial COI marker. Our sperm data supports the phylogenetic division between C. caeruleus and C. teneriffae, and also C. t. palmensis as sister to mainland Europe. We conclude that recent advances in analytical tools make short-read sequencing technology a powerful option for phylogenetic analyses. Lastly we suggest that the taxonomy of C. t. palmensis be revised.

Carlos Lopez-Vaamonde
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA)
France
Revealing the origin of an invasive insect using ancient DNA and historical herbaria
poster D21SY30PS0768

Author(s): Lopez-Vaamonde, C, Lees, D, Lack, W, Rougerie, R, Hernandez Lopez, A, Raus, T, Avtzis, ND, Augustin, S

Summary: 

Determining the origin of alien invasive species is crucial to developing invasive species management strategies. However, the origin of many alien species remains uncertain because of the lack of historical data. For instance, the moth Cameraria ohridella (Gracillariidae) was described in 1986, as a genus new to Europe and had managed to invade almost all Europe since 1989. Its larvae are leaf miners on the white flowering horse-chestnut (Aesculus hippocastanum), causing significant damage to their summer foliage. The fact that the appearance of C. ohridella in much of Western Europe has been so recent and dramatic, without earlier detection by entomologists, has made its origin a subject of debate . Originally thought to be a relict species in the Balkans, a more recent hypothesis is that the moth is an example of a sudden host plant shift to horse-chestnut, probably from maple or sycamore (Acer spp.), maybe combined with long distance translocation. Examination of horse-chestnut samples in seven historic herbarium collections revealed that almost half of 71 sheets had leaf mines with larvae/pupae inside. This material came from natural populations in Albania and Greece and dated from 1981 back to 1879. We extracted DNA from 54 archival larvae and used five COI minibarcode primer pairs developed specifically for C. ohridella. We successfully amplified DNA minibarcode fragments from 10 larvae extracted from herbarium specimens from 1936 to 1981. These archival sequences confirm an identity and Balkan origin for C. ohridella and the herbarium data set its history back by over a century. The herbaria reveal three previously unknown mitochondrial haplotypes. We also detected local outbreaks back to 1961 and dynamic frequency changes, which may be associated with road development. This case history demonstrates that herbaria are greatly underutilised in studies of invasive species origins, herbivore biodiversity and insect-plant interactions.

N-Öncü Maraci-Karaoglan
Institute of Environmental Sciences Bogazici University
Environmental Sciences
Turkey
Revealing Phylogenetic Relationship among Secale Species
poster D21SY30PS0105

Author(s): Maraci-Karaoglan, N, Bilgin, R, Özkan, H

Summary: 

Genus Secale belongs to the grass tribe Triticeae of Poacea family and includes annual and perennial species. In addition to cultivated rye, weedy and wild species also belong to the genus. The genus is quite heterogeneous with annual, perennial (long or short lived), wild, weedy, and cultivated forms. Taxonomy of the genus is still controversial due to the lack of agreement about diagnostic criteria and the number of species classified in the genus varies from three to 14 in different studies. According to most widely accepted classification, the taxon contains four species: Secale cereale, Secale vavilovii, Secale sylvestre, Secale striticum. Among these, Secale cereale and Secale striticum are polytypic. Furthermore there is no consensus on the origin of cultivated rye and evolutionary history of genus Secale. In order to gain new insights about phylogenetic relationships among Secale species and the degree of genetic diversity of genus, 142 different accessions of Secale species from different eco-geographical origins, with a detailed focus on Turkey and the Fertile Crescent is going to be evaluated morphologically and molecularly. Molecular analyses will include SSR and mitochondrial, chloroplastic and nuclear SNP.

Hugo Gante
University of Basel
Zoological Institute
Switzerland
Semi-permeable species boundaries and time-dependent reproductive isolation in Iberian Barbus and Luciobarbus (Teleostei, Cyprinidae)
poster D21SY30PS1280

Author(s): Gante, HF, Doadrio, I, Alves, MJUDITE, Dowling, TE

Summary: 

The study of species boundaries provides valuable information on how biodiversity is generated and maintained, but is complicated by several factors that influence the association of genetic and morphological variation with specific taxa. As taxa diverge, ancestral polymorphisms get sorted and independently evolved traits become correlated, allowing us to discriminate among different forms. Nevertheless, shared traits can often be observed among otherwise distinct taxa, reflecting recent common ancestry and incomplete sorting of characters, introgressive hybridization, or a combination of both. The two processes are difficult to separate, but the patterns they generate can potentially be discriminated using multiple markers and geographical information. The impact of these processes on the evolution of species boundaries is most easily studied in recently and rapidly radiating groups that show some degree of range overlap. Taxa that present these ideal characteristics are the speciose genera Barbus and Luciobarbus. Here we examine different classes of characters (external meristic traits, mtDNA and nuclear DNA) and their patterns of covariation in endemic Iberian barbels sampled from sympatric and allopatric populations. We show that species boundaries are permeable to gene flow, as sympatric populations of different species show an increased number of shared alleles compared to their allopatric counterparts. Furthermore, the degree of reproductive isolation is heterogeneous throughout the genome, since distinct nuclear markers show different levels of introgression. Finally, isolation seems to spread along the genome with the establishment of new mutations, as more distantly related species are more reproductively isolated than closely related ones.

Hugo Gante
University of Basel
Zoological Institute
Switzerland
Spatial and temporal scales of evolution of a pigmentation phenotype in cichlid fishes
poster D21SY30PS1278

Author(s): Gante, HF, Salzburger, W

Summary: 

Cichlid fishes are an excellent model system for speciation studies for their multiple radiations, in particular in East African lakes. In Lake Tanganyika, the most successful lineage of cichlids is the Lamprologini. One group of lamprologines, the Neolamprologus brichardi/pulcher complex, or Princess of Burundi, is found throughout the rocky shores of Lake Tanganyika. Different species occupy multiple discontinuous patches of coastal habitat and are characterized by differences in facial stripe pigmentation. Such pigmentation is relevant for intraspecific communication and previous results based on mtDNA data from 3 species suggest parallel evolution of facial stripe phenotypes. We assess the spatial and temporal scales of differentiation and speciation in this group of cichlids by analyzing mitochondrial and nuclear patterns of variation in 11 species and several hundreds of individuals originating at multiple localities from distinct patches of their distribution. We contrast these genetic and geographic data with facial stripe phenotypes to understand the evolution of this pigmentation trait in Neolamprologus.

Robert Verity
Queen Mary University of London
SBCS
United Kingdom
Spatial genetics of infectious disease; identifying multiple unknown sources
poster D21SY30PS1304

Author(s): Verity, R

Summary: 

One approach to landscape genetics is to describe the terrain as being comprised of a patchwork of genetically distinct populations. We present an alternative perspective, which treats each individual as having dispersed across the landscape from a source; that source being one of a number of alternatives. We argue that this methodology is much more effective in the analysis of biological invasions, the spread of infectious diseases, and related problems. We build a Dirichlet process model incorporating both spatial and genetic information, and demonstrate some of the useful outputs that can be obtained from this model structure. As well as inferring the likely location of the unknown sources, the model allows the actual number of sources to be directly estimated. Computational innovations provide the efficiency required to allow for biologically realistic (non-normal) dispersal, as well as a variety of mutation models.

Christiana Faria
School of Biological Science, University of East Anglia
Centre for Ecology, Evolution and Conservation
United Kingdom
Speciation beyond expectation: the evolution of Laparocerus (Curculionidae) in the Canary Islands
poster D21SY30PS1400

Author(s): Faria, CMA, Machado, A, Amorim, I, Borges, PAV, Gage, MJG, Emerson, BC

Summary: 

On a given island or archipelago, the proliferation of live has progressed much farther within some lineages than others. For example, among the 88 native genera of weevil within the Canary Islands, 128 species, more than one third of all described species, belong to a single genus, Laparocerus. The important question is not only why diversification occurs on islands, but why do some lineages diversify so extensively on islands, while others do not? As a first approach to understand why Laparocerus has diversified dramatically within the Canary Islands, we have sampled 176 individuals within the Laparocerus tessellatus species complex from across its distribution. Using mtDNA and nuclear ITS2 sequence data, we first ask to what extent geography structures genetic variation within species. To evaluate this we (i) characterise the geographic ranges of mitochondrial and nuclear alleles, and (ii) assess the extent to which alleles of recent common ancestry share similar geographic ranges, and (iii) test for geographic signal in patterns of genotypic relatedness. We then ask to what extent patterns of genetic relatedness among species reveal evolutionary process, in particular genetic admixture. To evaluate this we (i) identify alleles of recent common ancestry that are shared between species, and (ii) use a geographic framework for speciation to evaluate hypotheses of incomplete lineage sorting against gene flow. Both gene regions indicate an origin for the complex on Gran Canaria, and both reveal geographic structuring of genetic variation within islands. An unexpected result is that mtDNA data reveals each of the single species on LaPalma and ElHierro to be the product of more than one colonization event from more than one source island. In both cases nuclear data reveals these multiple colonisations to have been followed by genomic admixture. These results raise interesting possibilities for genomic admixture and evolutionary success within the genus Laparocerus*

Peter Shum
University of Salford
School of Environment & Life Sciences
United Kingdom
Speciation by depth in an oceanic fish?
poster D21SY30PS0301

Author(s): Shum, P, Pampoulie, C, Sacchi, C, Mariani, S

Summary: 

The glacial and post-glacial processes of the Pleistocene have been recognised to play a major role in promoting genetic differentiation, and in shaping the present-day diversity and distribution of biota. Little is known about the impact that such events had on processes of divergence in geographically overlapping, depth-stratified populations. In the ocean, diversification along depth gradients is likely to alter the visual environment of organisms, and adaptive changes in visual systems may be expected. Sebastes mentella, a now highly exploited deep-sea fish, exhibits patterns of substructure along a depth gradient in the central North Atlantic; here we performed a molecular genetic investigation of samples from fish collected above and below 500m, using the mitochondrial control region and the gene coding for the visual-pigment rhodopsin. We provide evidence for potential adaptation to different depths, by detecting a specific amino acid replacement, within the transmembrane domain of the rhodopsin gene. Mitochondrial DNA results reflect a scenario of long-term demographic independence between the S. mentella groups and raise the possibility that these ‘stocks’ may in fact be two incipient species. We stress the importance of incorporating depth as a diversifying agent, when assessing biodiversity and population structure in oceanic species.

David Vieites
National Museum of Natural Sciences -CSIC
Biogeography and Global Change
Spain
Speciation in a large tropical amphibian radiation
poster D21SY30PS0844

Author(s): Vieites, D, Nieto-Román, S, Peso-Fernández, M

Summary: 

The native amphibian fauna of Madagascar is constituted by five endemic evolutionary lineages of frogs with nearly 100% species-level endemism. Those include the endemic family Mantellidae that shows a wide species diversity within the island. Two undescribed mantellid species were also known from the oceanic Comoros Islands, which were colonized twice by oceanic dispersal ca. 6.5 mya. The recent discovery of a third species of mantellid frog in Comoros, sister and syntopic to one of the known Comoroan species, suggest that they have evolved in sympatry within the island. We here present phylogenetic, morphological, ecological and bioacoustic data of these species and discuss them within speciation scenarios that have been proposed for Mantellid frogs.

Vaclav Gvozdik
University of Basel
Department of Environmental Sciences
Switzerland
Speciation patterns in sky islands – a case study on Leptopelis frogs from the Eastern Arc Mountains, Tanzania
poster D21SY30PS1173

Author(s): Gvozdik, V, Menegon, M, Loader, SP

Summary: 

The “sky island” system of the Eastern Arc Mountains is an ideal study area as it possesses high species diversity and has species with apparently widespread distributions across isolated mountains. The sky Island system therefore is an excellent area for studying speciation processes. We studied an amphibian model, Leptopelis tree frogs, which are restricted to montane forest habitats. We investigate the causal factors that might drive speciation processes and evolution of various phenotypes in the Leptopelis tree frogs. This is achieved by using a combination of phylogeographical approaches, phenotypic data, and fine scale spatial tools (GIS distribution modelling). We will present preliminary data on our findings.

Vlad Dinca
Stockholm University
Department of Zoology
Sweden
Species limits and phylogeography of the Leptidea cryptic species complex (Lepidoptera: Pieridae)
poster D21SY30PS1306

Author(s): Dinca, V, Friberg, M, Lukhtanov, VA, Wiklund, C, Vila, R

Summary: 

Although European butterflies are among the best studied insects on the planet, cryptic species are still being discovered. The common and widespread Wood White butterfly L. sinapis was among the first cases shown to represent two different species (L. sinapis and L. reali). However, very recently, it has been discovered that yet another cryptic species, L. juvernica, has been hidden within L. reali. The presence of such surprising levels of cryptic diversity in an already intensively studied system, makes the Leptidea triplet a unique case among European butterflies and prompted us to study the species limits and phylogeography of the cryptic species complex. Through extensive mating experiments, we found that all three species are reproductively isolated due to female mate choice of exclusively conspecific males. The three species are closely related but differentiated genetically. They have homogeneous intraspecific genetic structures suggesting that their current distributions are the result of a postglacial colonization from a single glacial refugium for each species. The only differentiated lineage are the Irish L. juvernica, that may have survived in southern Ireland during the last glacial maximum. Recent findings indicate that L. sinapis is the species with the highest known chromosome number variability (2n=56-106), excluding cases of polyploidy. Interestingly, the variation in chromosome numbers follows a longitudinally-oriented cline. This context offers the rare possibility to test the concept of clinal species. Our preliminary results based on mating between different chromosomal races of L. sinapis suggest that pronounced differences in karyotypes associated with multiple chromosomal rearrangements are not strongly detrimental in this species.

Martim Melo
University of Porto
CIBIO
Portugal
Sympatric speciation in the Gulf of Guinea islands finches is supported by multiple independent molecular markers
poster D21SY30PS0139

Author(s): Melo, M, Stervander, M, Hansson, B

Summary: 

Sympatric speciation is contentious and convincing examples from nature remain very scarce. Here we present multiple lines of molecular evidence supporting a sympatric origin for one of the most enigmatic birds in the world, the São Tomé grosbeak Crithagra concolor. This endemic from São Tomé Island, Gulf of Guinea, was initially placed in a monotypic genus, Neospiza. Mitochondrial data placed it as sister to the Príncipe seedeater Crithagra rufobrunneus, a Gulf of Guinea endemic with populations on the islands of São Tomé, Príncipe and Boné de Jóquei. For 29-30 seedeaters (9-10 per population), three grosbeak samples and outgroups we sequenced mitochondrial markers (c. 1000 bp), 27 nuclear introns and 6 exons (c. 20,000 bp), and we genotyped 33 microsatellite loci. All molecular markers inferred a closer relationship between the São Tomé grosbeak and the seedeater population from São Tomé, than between all three allopatric seedeater populations. Mitochondrial markers had a strong phylogenetic signal (no shared haplotypes, c. 2.5% sequence divergence between the sympatric grosbeak and seedeater). In contrast, lineage sorting of the nuclear markers was incomplete (albeit unique grosbeak mutations were also present). This pattern is consistent with sympatric speciation followed by incomplete lineage sorting of the nuclear markers rather than with past hybridization events (that would have homogenised the mtDNA faster than the nDNA).

José Luis Blanco-Pastor
Real Jardín Botánico (CSIC)
Department of Biodiversity and Conservation
Spain
Systematics in presence of reticulation and incomplete lineage sorting: the case of Linaria sect. Supinae
poster D21SY30PS0824

Author(s): Blanco-Pastor, J, Vargas, P, Pfeil, BE

Summary: 

We examined the phylogenetic history of Linaria with special emphasis on the Mediterranean sect. Supinae (44 species). We revealed extensive highly supported incongruence among two nuclear (ITS, AGT1) and two plastid regions (rpl32-trnLUAG, trnS-trnG). Coalescent simulations, a hybrid detection test and species tree inference in BEAST revealed that incomplete lineage sorting and hybridization may both be responsible for the incongruent pattern observed. Additionally, we present a multilabelled BEAST species tree as an alternative approach that allows the possibility of observing multiple placements in the species tree for the same taxa. That permitted the incorporation of processes such as hybridization within the tree while not violating the assumptions of the *BEAST model. This methodology is presented as a functional tool to disclose the evolutionary history of species complexes that have experienced both hybridization and incomplete lineage sorting. The drastic climatic events that have occurred in the Mediterranean since the late Miocene, including the Quaternary-type climatic oscillations, may have made both processes highly recurrent in the Mediterranean flora.

Tatiana Galinskaya
Biological Faculty, Lomonosov Moscow State University
Department of Entomology
Russia
Tephritoidea (Insects: Diptera) phylogeny, based on morphological and molecular data
poster D21SY30PS0053

Author(s): Galinskaya, TV

Summary: 

Tephritoidea family includes families Lonchaeidae, Tephritidae, Ulidiidae (uncluding Otitidae), Platystomatidae, Pyrgotidae, Tachiniscidae, Pallopteridae, Piophilidae and Richardiidae. We analyzed external morphology and genital structures of all these families. We found apomorphies and plesiomorphies in morphological characters and reconstructed modern phylogeny of the group. We discovered several new aspects of the evolution of this group, including that Ulidiidae + Otitidae form a paraphyletic group, referring to derived Tephritoidea. Therefore, we consider Ulidiidae and Otitidae as separate families. We also studied sequences of the COI gene of 58 specimens of 25 species of Ulidiidae and Otitidae. COI was shown to be an effective marker to distinguish Ulidiidae and Otitidae species. Monophyly of the family Ulidiidae with the inclusion of Homalocephala not confirmed on any of the molecular reconstruction. The position of the genus Homalocephala is indefinite. Our study of genital structures has shown that the genus Homalocephala cannot be included neither in Ulidiidae, nor in Otitidae. It represents the separate clade within the Tephritoidea, which requires further study.

Francois Rousset
CNRS & Université Montpellier 2
Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution
France
Testing environmental and genetic effects in correlated landscapes
poster D21SY30PS0776

Author(s): Rousset, F, Ferdy, J

Summary: 

Correlated random effects are a well-recognized concern for observational data in general, and more specifically for spatial data in ecology. Generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) with correlated random effects are a potential framework for handling these correlations. However, as the result of statistical and practical issues, GLMMs have been put into practice through of undocumented use of procedures based on penalized quasi-likelihood approximations (PQL), and under restrictive models of spatial correlation. Alternatively, they are often neglected in favor of simpler but more questionable approaches such as partial Mantel tests. In this work we aim to provide practical and validated means of inference under spatial GLMMs, that overcome these limitations. For this purpose, an R package is developed to fit spatial GLMMs. We assess the performance of likelihood ratio tests for fixed effects under spatial autocorrelation, based on Laplace or PQL approximations of the likelihood. Expectedly, the Laplace approximation performs generally slightly better than PQL, although a variant of PQL was better in the binary case, where it could be expected from previous works to perform worst. Finally, we illustrate the efficiency of a bootstrap procedure for correcting the small sample bias of the tests.

L. Lacey Knowles
University of Michigan
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
United States
Testing the when, where, and how of divergence with species-specific predictions of genetic variation under alternative hypotheses
talk D24SY30IT10:30R1

Author(s): Knowles, L

Summary: 

Recent developments at the molecular level, as well as computational advances that include the forging of diverse approaches, have the potential to dramatically increase the insights of phylogeographic studies. I will describe one such approach – namely, testing hypotheses based on species-specific predictions about patterns of genetic variation under different scenarios. By example, I will show how the coupling of species distributional models with demographic and genetic models can be used to test alternative hypotheses in an endemic lizard from southwest Australia, Lerista lineopunctulata, about the role of geographic, environmental, and changing climatic conditions in structuring genetic variation across the landscape. Because the lizard is distributed along the coastal sand plain or dunes, a habitat that is discontinuous today and that has shifted over time, it is conceivable that population genetic divergence could reflect the contemporary habitat configuration, which limits migration among the small geographically isolated populations, or colonization processes associated with historical shifts in the species distribution, given that a habitat specialist would track climate-induced habitat shifts. With the modeling of these alternative scenarios and tests of multilocus data using approximate Bayesian computation, I show that the dynamic history of shifting environmental conditions since the last glacial maximum, not the geographic configuration or populations or the contemporary environment itself, is the primary factor structuring genetic variation. I also highlight how this approach can be expanded to multiple species, where the goal is not to quantify concordance, as with traditional comparative phylogeographic approaches, but instead to understand why patterns of genetic variation are (or are not) similar across species.

Federico Giri
Instituto Nacional de Limnología (INALI-CONICET-UNL)
Laboratorio de Macrocrustáceos
Argentina
The carapace structure of freshwater pseudocrabs of the Aeglidae family. An adaptation or exaptation case?
poster D21SY30PS1272

Author(s): Giri, F, Collins, PA

Summary: 

The Aeglidae family had its origin in freshwater environments 74 million years ago approximately. From that, the species in the family has suffered continuous environmental changes. In the present work we present a hypothesis about de carapace structure and their role in the evolution of the family. The structure selected was the carapace due to the multiple interpretations of its interaction in decapods. In addition to the fact that its shape is a distinctive feature of the taxa, species presents lines and grooves whose origin and function are still under debate. This pattern of lines and grooves divides the carapace into discrete units (modules), and appear as an autapomorphy of a genus of uncertain origin and functions. Some authors discuss the function for such lines and grooves as representative of evolutionary ancestral limits, whereas others put forward that some carapace grooves in decapods are secondary structures. Specimens of different species of the Aeglidae Family were photographed and 31 landmarks were selected representing the carapace whose was divided into 5 modules according the lines and grooves. The modules were compared among them intraspecifically and interspecifically and different degrees of variation were observed. Intraspecific analysis reveals that the modules, corresponding to anterior region of the pseudocrabs, present greater variation than those of the posterior region of the carapace. While interspecifically, the pattern of shape variation are the same and statistical significance were observed among the same modules. Then, the evidence analyzed could be interpreted as modules like by product of adaptation in changing environments or exaptation to other functional structures, as different pressures of others appendices or internal organs.

Rafael Rubio de Casas
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Granada
Ecología
Spain
The effect of habitat on plant diversification: a macroevolutionary approach
talk D21SY30RT16:57R2

Author(s): Rubio de Casas, R, Soltis, PS, Mort, ME, Soltis, DE

Summary: 

The close relationship between plants and their habitats is a research subject of long-standing interest. However, the macroevolutionary patterns of this association are still unclear. For instance, it is not known whether habitat conditions affect the diversification of plant lineages. Moreover, few studies have investigated if ecological conservatism is a general phenomenon with comparable patterns across habitats and lineages. Here we present an analysis of habitat evolution in Saxifragales, an angiosperm clade exhibiting diverse morphologies and habitats. Using well-resolved phylogenies built with a super-matrix approach and habitat data for ~1000 taxa (50% of the group) we investigate a) The pattern of habitat evolution: the most likely ancestral habitat and the rates of transition across the different classes of habitats b) The association between diversification rates and habitat, determining if the speciousness of certain lineages is related to their habitat; or, if on the contrary, certain habitats are linked to higher extinction rates c) Ecological conservatism across lineages and habitats: if the adaptation to certain habitats constrains diversification into other environments, and whether the constrains are equivalent for different habitats Our results show that from a forest-inhabiting ancestor, the Saxifragales have transitioned into a variety of environments. Some of these habitat shifts appear to have triggered bursts of diversification. Seemingly harsh environments, such as rock cliffs and the tundra, are linked to high diversity and have been occupied and abandoned repeatedly throughout evolution. Conversely, deserts contain only ancient, species-poor lineages, and the transition into an aquatic medium seems irreversible. This indicates that although adaptation to extreme conditions can lead to evolutionary cul-de-sacs, this phenomenon is complex and very dependent on as-yet unknown underlying physiological and morphological changes.

Ricardo Azevedo
University of Houston
Department of Biology and Biochemistry
United States
The effect of recombination on population differentiation
poster D21SY30PS1347

Author(s): Azevedo, RBR

Summary: 

Evolution can be viewed as the movement of populations through a space of genotypes. This space can be modeled as a network connecting genotypes accessible through mutation. Here I investigate the evolutionary dynamics in the simplest version of the genotype network model, where all genotypes in the network have the same fitness (the neutral network model), combined with a finite island model of population subdivision. I find that the structure of the genotype network determines whether there is a positive or negative correlation between recombination rate and population differentiation at equilibrium.

Fernando Seixas
CIBIO
Portugal
The hidden history of the Snowshoe hare (Lepus americanus): deep intraspecific divergence and massive mitochondrial DNA introgression
talk D22SY30RT10:30R9

Author(s): Seixas, F, Cheng, E, Alves, PC, Alves, PC, Alves, PC, Mills, SL, Melo-Ferreira, J

Summary: 

The analysis of molecular variation in wild populations often allows uncovering fundamental evolutionary processes that could otherwise remain unknown. Lepus americanus is the most widespread North American hare and its ecology has been vastly studied. However, knowledge on its evolutionary history is very scarce. A recent work based on microsatellite and mtDNA data suggested that this species is structured in three major units, which may have resulted from fragmentation during Pleistocene glaciations. Also, it suggested that the mtDNA lineage of one of these units is more closely related to that of a neighboring southern species, Lepus californicus, which could result from introgression or sharing ancestral polymorphism. Here, we sequenced nine loci, representative of all inheritance compartments (6774 bp), and shed light on the evolutionary history of L. americanus (48 specimens), taking also into account the evolution of L. californicus (30 specimens) and a third North American species, L. townsendii (18 specimens). Using a coalescent-based species tree inference method we show that the three evolutionary units of L. americanus have genealogical relevance and that one of the groups, widely distributed along the Boreal region, diverged at about 2 Mya, i.e. at the same time scale of the split between L. californicus and L. townsendii (1.6 Mya), without obvious morphological or ecological divergence. Also, coalescent simulations based on parameters of speciation inferred using the IM model, suggest that massive ancient mtDNA introgression occurred 680 kya from L. californicus into the Pacific Northwest populations of L. americanus. Interestingly, the specimens in this region have a peculiar morphology, since some do not molt to the white winter coat, an uncommon phenotypic variation in L. americanus. The snowshoe hare is thus a valuable model to understand cryptic divergence, adaptation and speciation in the presence of gene flow.

Göran Arnqvist
University of Uppsala
Department of Ecology and Genetics
Sweden
The maintenance of mitochondrial genetic variation by negative frequency-dependent selection
talk D23SY30RT14:48R8

Author(s): Arnqvist, G, Kazancioglu, E

Summary: 

The processes that maintain biological and genetic diversity are not fully understood. Mitochondrial genes, which encode proteins involved in a key energetic pathway in eukaryotic cells, often show high levels of standing genetic variation. This observation is especially puzzling, given the accumulating evidence for life history and fitness effects of mitochondrial genetic variation, because selection should rapidly exhaust genetic variation in the mitochondrial genome. Negative frequency-dependent selection, where the relative fitness of a genotype is inversely related to its frequency in a population, provides a potent and potentially general process that can maintain mitochondrial genetic polymorphism. However, empirical tests of this possibility are lacking. Here, we present experimental evidence that negative frequency-dependent selection acts to maintain polymorphism in mitochondrial genes. We assessed the change in mitochondrial haplotype frequencies over 10 generations of experimental evolution in a large number of seed beetle populations, where haplotypes competed for propagation to subsequent generations. We found that haplotypes consistently increased in frequency when they were initially rare and decreased in frequency when initially common. Furthermore, the strength of frequency-dependent selection was contingent upon epistatic mitonuclear interactions, directly supporting the tenet that intergenomic epistasis is important in mtDNA evolution. Our results have important implications for the use of mtDNA haplotype frequency data to estimate population level phenomena and they revive the general hypothesis that negative frequency-dependent selection may commonly facilitate genetic polymorphism in life history traits.

André Levy
ISPA-IU
Biology
Portugal
The phylogeny and biogeography of Blenniidae (Perciformes)
poster D21SY30PS0011

Author(s): Levy, A, Almada, VC

Summary: 

The blenniidae are a diverse family of tropical and subtropical benthic marine fish, with more than 400 species distributed worldwide. We present a novel phylogeny of Blenniidae, based on nuclear and mitochondrial markers, and discuss its taxonomic and biogeographic implications.

Agata Banaszek
University of Bialystok, Institute of Biology
Department of Genetics and Evolution
Poland
The phylogeography of the common hamster, the species endangered in Europe
poster D21SY30PS0832

Author(s): Banaszek, A, Jadwiszczak, KA, Rusin, M

Summary: 

The common hamster (Cricetus cricetus L.) is a formerly steppe species, in Europe generally restricted to agricultural sites. The changes in agriculture practice, urbanization of formerly agricultural areas, direct persecution and, most probably, climate change caused the breakdown of populations in many European countries. For any conservation plans, it is essential to gain information about the phylogeographic lineages and their source, refugial populations. In Europe, three phylogeographic lineages were described so far: North in Western Europe and Germany, Pannonia in the Carpathian Basin and E1 lineage in Eastern Poland and Western Ukraine. Paleontological data suggest that the common hamster survived the maximal glaciations in the Ukrainian and European Russian belt of steppes. The aim of this work was to describe the genetic differentiation of the Ukrainian populations, which could serve as a source of westward expansion of hamsters into Central and Western Europe. The phylogeographic analysis was performed on the basis of three sequences of mitochondrial DNA (the control region, 16S rRNA and cytochrome b) and six conserved intron loci located on the Y chromosome (YCATS). The phylogeographic relationships of the analyzed populations will be described on the basis of the gene trees and networks of haplotypes. The levels of diversity will be compared with other described populations.

Conrad Gillett
University of East Anglia
School of Biological Sciences
United Kingdom
The root of all weevils: towards a tribal-level molecular phylogeny of the Curculionidae (Insecta: Coleoptera)
poster D21SY30PS1239

Author(s): Gillett, CPDT, Emerson, B

Summary: 

The true weevils are the most species-rich family-level taxon in the living world, numbering around 50,000 described species found across the globe in all terrestrial and subaquatic habitats where vegetation can grow. However, no fine-scale higher-level molecular phylogeny exists for this family as a whole, many of whose constituent subfamilies and tribes remain contentious because of widespread homoplasy in traditional morphological characters. Lack of a robust phylogeny has led to significant disagreements in weevil classification and taxonomy. This study aims to reconstruct the phylogeny of the Curculionidae at the level of the 292 currently recognized tribes and subtribes using molecular sequence data from multiple sources. The phylogeny is being achieved through a two-step protocol to maximise both taxon-sampling and sequence data (by utilising multiple mitochondrial and nuclear markers). Sequences from a long (c. 10Kb) portion of the mitochondrial genome were obtained using Long-Range PCR and next generation sequencing techniques from well-preserved specimens. These data were used to build a fundamental phylogenetic ‘scaffold’ comprising the main lineages, including most subfamilies. A further set of tribal representatives were sequenced for several nuclear and mitochondrial genes (18S, Arginine kinase, 28S, Histone 3, 16S, cox1) for finer resolution of the weevil tree. We also developed techniques for sequencing short phylogenetically informative short-amplicons from dried museum specimens, which typically contain fragmented DNA. The resulting phylogenetic hypotheses will help in uunderstanding the evolutionary history of morphological characters such as elytro-tergal stridulation and the rostral canal and receptacle, and the co-evolution and diversification of weevil lineages with specific angiosperm lineages. In addition, formal recognition of monophyletic lineages should lead to increased stability in weevil classification.

Matthias Stöck
Leibniz-Institute of Freshwater Ecology and Inland Fisheries
Germany
Time scales of anuran speciation inferred from hybrid zones of Palearctic green toads (Bufo viridis subgroup) in a phylogeographic framework
poster D21SY30PS1288

Author(s): Stöck, M, Dufresnes, C, Betto-Colliard, C, Bonato, L, Kornilios, P, Lymberakis, P, Novarini, N, Savary, R, Sicilia, A, Turrisi, GF, Perrin, N

Summary: 

A central assumption in evolutionary biology is that reproductive isolation accumulates with increasing genetic distance and thus divergence time. In anuran amphibians, experimental breeding might still produce viable offspring after >20 My divergence. However, the timing of speciation in closely related anuran lineages is poorly studied. Green toads with differently old forms in secondary contact offer an ideal system. In a phylogeographic framework (>300 locs., >700 mtDNAs), we molecularly examine divergence times, and interactions in three natural hybrid zones (>150 populations; 12 msats, mtDNA). Under Plio-Pleistocene (2.7 Mya) divergence (Sicily: B. siculus, B. balearicus), we demonstrated advanced reproductive isolation with bidirectional mtDNA (40 km) but scarce nuclear introgression. Pairwise FST maxima, but genetic diversity (He) minima at the contact suggested absence of current gene flow. In northeastern Italy, we studied interactions between younger lineages of early Pleistocene (1.9 Mya) divergence (B. balearicus, B. viridis) that pose a striking contrast. We found significantly greater nuclear (40 km) and wider asymmetric, differential mtDNA introgression (100 km), with a slight He increase at the centre, and pairwise FST changing smoothly across the hybrid zone. FST maxima occur in most apart populations, mirror isolation by distance and a significant effect of dispersal barriers (Po, Adige). After middle Pleistocene divergence (1.2 Mya), in Greece (B. variabilis, B. viridis; work in progr.), a uniform mtDNA lineage of Asia Minor variabilis has colonized the viridis refugium on the Balkan Peninsula. MtDNA and nuDNA-hybridization stretch >200 km. All of this reflects profound differences in hybridization between lineages from the same radiation, which are mostly distinguished by evolutionary age. Our study is in line with research on other anuran species but has the advantage to compare differently diverged lineages from the same radiation.

Pedro Almeida
Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa
Departamento de Ciências da Vida, Centro de Recursos Microbiológicos (CREM)
Portugal
Tracing the origins of domestication in the wine yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
talk D23SY30RT11:18R8

Author(s): Almeida, PM, Bensasson, D, Sampaio, JP

Summary: 

The domestication of plants and animals represents a milestone in human history because it triggered critical transitions of human civilizations. Recent studies suggest that the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which is used nowadays in the fermentation of wine and other alcoholic beverages worldwide, illustrates the case of a microbe that has been also domesticated. However, the vast wealth of knowledge that has been gathered for the understanding of crop and livestock domestication contrasts markedly with our ignorance on microbe domestication. Recent advances in sequencing technology are providing novel opportunities for microbe population and evolutionary studies through the availability of genome-wide molecular markers that allow an unprecedented fine scale resolution of population dynamics and organismic evolution. Here, we have surveyed sequence variation using whole-genome sequencing in a dataset of S. cerevisiae strains that were isolated from natural environments (putative wild populations) and human-associated niches (putative domesticated populations), from different geographic regions at a global scale. The hypothesis to be tested is that the wild ancestors of wine yeasts are found close the main center of origin and spread of winemaking. We found a distinct and previously undescribed phylogenetic lineage of S. cerevisiae that is the closest known wild relative to the wine yeast group and is distributed along the Mediterranean basin. We propose that these two lineages diverged only recently, a view that is reinforced by the proportion of shared alleles and the low number of fixed differences between them. We discuss the significance of an excess of rare variants in the wine group relative to wild strains. The work described here seeks to provide new insights into the history of domestication and improve our knowledge on the ecology of this important microbe.

Nicolas Dussex
University of Otago, New Zealand
Department of Zoology
New Zealand
Unexpected genetic population structure in the Kea (Nestor notabilis)
poster D21SY30PS1356

Author(s): Dussex, N

Summary: 

The Kea (Nestor notabilis) is an endemic alpine parrot of the South Island of New Zealand. After 150 years of persecution, it was fully protected in 1986, but the species is still declining over its whole range. Here I present data from 17 microsatellite and one mitochondrial markers for Kea sampled at nine different locations along the length of the South Island. Kea are known to have considerable dispersal capabilities and are sometimes sighted far from their alpine habitat. It is therefore expected that such a potential for gene flow would make distant populations less genetically differentiated. However, we found a significant isolation by distance (IBD) pattern. Moreover three distinct genetic clusters were identified using microsatellite data while mitochondrial data identified two main groups of haplotypes. Our data suggest that kea population might have been reduced to at least one refugium during the last glaciations and subsequently recolonized their range. We discuss possible causes for this unexpected population structure, including social behavior and call differences as a barrier to dispersal, the “beech-gap” hypothesis and potential implications for species management.

Tomasz Suchan
University of Lausanne
Department of Ecology and Evolution
Switzerland
Unravelling landscape factors shaping spatial genetic structures of species involved in a specific plant-insect mutualism
poster D21SY30PS1287

Author(s): Suchan, T, Alvarez, N

Summary: 

Nursery pollination is one of the most fascinating examples of plant-pollinator interactions, in which the pollinator also acts as a seed parasite. In Europe, only few species evolved towards this strategy, with the notable example of the European globeflower Trollius europaeus and its exclusive fly pollinators in the genus Chiastocheta (Diptera: Anthomyiidae). In this interaction the plant is exclusively pollinated by flies, whereas in turn larvae eat a fraction of the developed seeds.

Because of the relatively simple nature of this interaction (one plant and a small set of pollinators), this system can serve as a model for studying how topography influences genetic diversity of mutualistic species. This question is of major importance in evolutionary biology as plants and insects generally show different population parameters associated with contrasting life-history traits, and as a consequence, different spatio-temporal dynamics, challenging maintenance of specificity in a coevolutionary framework. The novelty of the study also lies in the combination of data sampled from two trophic levels at different spatial scales and in four replicates, using specimens collected from four mountain massifs, i.e. the Sudetes, Tatra (Poland), Alps, and Jura (Switzerland).

As the genus Chiastocheta encompasses seven species, our approach also allows comparing the spatial genetic structures of different pollinator species, which, despite being closely related, sympatric over large areas, and ecologically similar, differ in natural history traits such as oviposition patterns and resource exploitation strategies. Finally this study evaluates the level of congruence in spatial genetic structures between the insects and the plant, allowing examination of the extent to which plant gene flow is driven by pollinators’ dispersal patterns rather than by seed dispersal.

Pierre-Jean Malé
University of Toulouse III, France
Lab. Evolution & Biological Diversity
France
Using Next-Gen Sequencing to resolve the phylogeny of tropical tree family
poster D21SY30PS0480

Author(s): Malé, PG, Bardon, L, Coissac, E, Tinaut, A, Engel, J, Scotti-Saintagne, C, Chave, J

Summary: 

Next-Generation Sequencing have brought a great leap forward in a large range of biological questions, including phylogenetics. However, the usual genome reduction or organellar purification steps are often time-consuming, costly, and require large amounts of biological material. This is especially problematic in tropical woody plants where secondary compounds are likely to interfere with chemical reactions related to DNA extractions and library preparation. We explored whether shallow shotgun sequencing of total DNA may be used to resolve the phylogeny of the pantropical tree family Chrysobalanaceae. This technique takes advantage of the difference in the per-cell-copy number between organellar, nuclear ribosomal and nuclear DNA, and thus does not require any treatment of the extracted total DNA prior to the library preparation. Even with a very low sequencing depth of the nuclear DNA, we were able to assemble the total plastidic genome (about 160 kb) and the nuclear ribosomal region (around 6.5 kb), and we retrieved almost all the mitochondrial genes (around 70 kb) for all the Chrysobalanaceae species tested (n = 8). Using these data, we resolved ancient nodes of the family phylogeny that had remained unresolved in a previous Sanger-based study. We also successfully demonstrate that this technique may be applied to two other tropical tree families also known for being rich in secondary organic compounds. In this study, we demonstrate that shallow sequencing of total DNA is efficient to build reliable phylogenetic hypotheses, especially in chemically complex organisms such as tropical plants. This approach should help unveil key remaining on the origin and diversification of flowering plants.

Rocio Santos-Gally
Universidad de Sevilla
Biologia Vegetal y Ecologia
Spain
Was Darwin right? Pollinators, floral traits and heterostyly, an old question revisited in the light of comparative evidence
poster D21SY30PS0661

Author(s): Santos-Gally, R, Gonzalez-Voyer, A, Arroyo, J

Summary: 

The increasing availability of phylogenetic reconstructions presents the opportunity to test relevant hypotheses about the origin and diversity of plant sexual polymorphisms. Heterostyly, a pervasive discrete floral polymorphism across lineages of flowering plants, has attracted the interest of evolutionary biologists since Darwin’s book The different forms of flowers.... Early evolutionary models based on genetics explained the origin and maintenance of heterostyly as an anti-selfing mechanism. The genetic hypothesis contrasted with Darwinian views, which considered heterostyly as a device to promote outcrossing in hermaphroditic plants without the constraints imposed by self-interference between male and female functions and lack of precision in pollen transfer in hermaphroditic flowers. The mostly ecological Darwinian hypothesis posits a key role for particular pollinators, which are able to efficiently transfer pollen between different morphs. Both hypotheses agree on the fact that heterostyly is a typical mechanism for disassortative mating and is governed by negative frequency-dependent selection, although the factors proposed as important for the evolution of the trait differ. We surveyed occurrence of heterostyly across angiosperms families and genera to trace its evolution across the phylogeny. We determined the number of independent evolutionary transitions from monomorphism to heterostyly, and also the ancestral condition of heterostyly (approach herkogamy or non-herkogamy as suggested by the two competing evolutionary models). Finally we analysed whether the presence of heterostyly is evolutionarily correlated with flower architecture and developmental constraints, such as (1) tubular flowers which restrict pollinator movements and ensure more exact pollen deposition on their bodies, (2) regular flowers which do not restrict pollinator movements within the flower, and (3) flower with free stamens (not connate to the perianth).

Sara Valente
Centre of Marine Sciences
Portugal
West vs East Mediterranean Sea: origin and genetic differentiation of the sea cucumber Holothuria polii
poster D21SY30PS0605

Author(s): Valente, SM, González-Wangüemert, M, Serrão, EA

Summary: 

We studied the genetic structure of the sea cucumber Holothuria (Roweothuria) polii (Delle Chiaje 1823) by analyzing the mitochondrial DNA variation in a fragment of cytochrome oxidase I (COI) and 16S genes. Individuals were collected in 7 locations along the Mediterranean Sea, which cover a wide range of the species distribution. We found high haplotype diversity for COI and moderate for 16S and low nucleotide diversity for both genes. Our results for the COI gene showed many recent and exclusive haplotypes with few mutations between them, which suggests populations might be under expansion. The Western and Eastern Mediterranean populations exhibited slight but significant genetic differentiation showing the highest genetic diversity on the East. The most ancient haplotype was not present in the most western sampling location (Spain). Also, Kusadasi (Turkey) displayed the oldest expansion time, which corresponds to mid Pleistocene epoch, as well as the highest genetic diversity (number of exclusive haplotypes, polymorphisms, haplotype and nucleotide diversity). This suggests that individuals from Kusadasi could be the origin of the subsequent colonizations through the Mediterranean Sea. However, for future research, nuclear markers should be used to confirm this hypothesis. Keywords: Genetic structure, colonization, Holothuria polii, Mitochondrial DNA, Mediterranean Sea

Karen McCoy
CNRS
MiVEGEC, UMR 5290 CNRS-IRD-UM
France
Worldwide colonisation history of the seabird tick Ixodes uriae and what it can tell us about the evolution of host specialisation
poster D21SY30PS0620

Author(s): McCoy, KD, Boulinier, T, Dietrich, M

Summary: 

Historical patterns of dispersal and population isolation are key components shaping contemporary genetic diversity across landscapes. Here, we investigate the colonisation history of a common ectoparasite of colonial seabirds, the tick Ixodes uriae. This tick has a circumpolar distribution across both hemispheres, but has repeatedly formed host-specific races within different seabird host communities. By combining mitochondrial and nuclear data and analyzing this data using both phylogenetic and phylogeographic frameworks, we infer how this species reached its present-day distribution and how the colonisation process has affected the geographic structuring of this tick among colonies and host species. We show the existence of four/five genetic groups that correspond to well-defined geographic regions. Our data indicates that Ixodes uriae colonised the southern hemisphere before moving into northern latitudes. However, no relationship between the degree of host race evolution and colonisation history was evident suggesting that host specialisation can evolve rapidly but never leads to speciation. We discuss the possible historical and contemporary mechanisms of large scale dispersal for this ectoparasite and how its biological characteristics may condition current patterns of genetic diversity.

FCULCBACESAMBioFIGISPAIICTESEB

© 2012-2013 Bruno Vieira
